 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02686 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports and statement of reasons (SOR) establish 13 
delinquent debts totaling $17,642. In the last two years, Applicant paid eight medical 
debts and one child-support debt, totaling $6,936. He has kept some non-SOR debts 
current. While additional sustained financial effort is necessary, he has established a 
track record of debt payment and resolution. Financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On July 9, 2013, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On October 
1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not find under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. 
On February 23, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On January 8, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 
14, 2015, the case was assigned to another administrative judge; however, he was 
unable to arrange a video teleconference (VTC). On April 20, 2015, the case was 
transferred to me. Applicant was unable to make it to a VTC site until November 2015. 
On October 21, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for November 17, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was 
held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, and Applicant 
offered two exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript 
(Tr.) 17-19; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B) After the hearing, 
Applicant provided five additional exhibits, which were admitted without objection. (AE 
C-G) On November 30, 2015, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.m. He explained he paid his child-support debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. (HE 3) He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is a station 
mechanic at an isolated location. (Tr. 6) He has worked at the isolated location since 
2008. (Tr. 27) He spends eight months at the site, and four months at home with his 
family. (Tr. 28) Applicant’s spouse handles their finances while he is at the remote site. 
(Tr. 29) His spouse made budgeting errors and neglected some of their bills. (GE 2) 
 
In 1993, Applicant graduated from high school, and he has not attended college. 
(Tr. 6) In 2007, he married, and he has four children or step children, who are ages 6, 8, 
16, and 17. (Tr. 7, 15; GE 1) He had child-support obligations from a previous 
relationship. He has held a security clearance for 15 years. (Tr. 8)    
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his spouse’s and children’s medical 
problems. (Tr. 20) From 2003 to 2013, Applicant’s spouse had three back surgeries, 
one child has a seizure disorder, and another of his children broke the growth plate in 
her knee. (Tr. 20-22) Applicant had emergency room bills, ambulance bills, and medical 
insurance copays. (Tr. 20-25; AE A; AE B) Applicant was unable to pay his child 
support, and his pay was garnished. (Tr. 20)  
 
Applicant’s credit reports, SOR, and SOR response established 13 delinquent 
debts totaling $17,642, and their status is as follows: 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f and 1.k through 1.m are nine delinquent medical debts 
for $151, $101, $416, $74, $121, $351, $392, $382, and $355. On July 28, 2015, the 
medical creditor provided an account statement indicating payments received of $253, 
$347, $309, $94, $77, $52, 87, and $136; however, $1,080 is the consolidated 
remainder still owed on the medical debt. (Tr. 31-40; AE A; AE B) He intends to pay off 
his medical debts first. (Tr. 40-41) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a telecommunications debt for $627.  Applicant intends to pay this 
debt after the medical debts are resolved. (Tr. 41) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h is a bank debt for $3,034. In 2007, Applicant began paying $200 
monthly for 12 months, and he believes the debt was resolved in 2008. (Tr. 43-44) He 
disputes his responsibility for this debt. (Tr. 43) He promised to investigate the status of 
this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i is a medical credit card debt for $7,437. (Tr. 46) Applicant was 
unaware of this debt until he received the SOR. (Tr. 28) The debt has been delinquent 
since 2009. (GE 4) He intends to pay this debt. (Tr. 48) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is a debt for child support for $4,201. On January 1, 2014, Applicant’s 
child support was behind by $5,581. (AE D at 2) As of May 11, 2015, Applicant’s child- 
support debt was current, and his balance is zero. (Tr. 50-53; AE D at 1) 
 
Applicant’s 2013 and 2014 credit reports show numerous paid accounts. (GE 3; 
GE 4) He is current on his taxes. (GE 1; GE 3; GE 4) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor for the previous 10 years describes Applicant as 
dedicated, diligent, dependable, courteous, honest, trustworthy, and conscientious. (AE 
C) A coworker describes Applicant as dependable, trustworthy, and serious about 
resolving delinquent debts. (AE E) A manager of Applicant’s company said Applicant is 
a trustworthy, dependable, and highly valued, dedicated, and reliable employee. (AE G)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, SOR response, and hearing record. 
Applicant’s SOR alleges, and the evidence establishes a history of 13 delinquent debts 
totaling $17,642. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his 
spouse’s and children’s medical problems. From 2003 to 2013, Applicant’s spouse had 
three back surgeries, one child has a seizure disorder, and another of his children broke 
the growth plate in her knee. He had emergency room bills, ambulance bills, and 
medical insurance copays. Applicant was unable to pay his child support, and his pay 
was garnished. Applicant was deployed; his spouse was responsible for paying their 
debts; and his spouse neglected some of their bills. These are all circumstances beyond 
his control which adversely affected his finances. In the last two years, Applicant paid 
eight medical debts and one child-support debt, totaling $6,936. He believes the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h for $3,034 is paid. The statute of limitations may bar collection of the medical 
credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.i for $7,437, as it became delinquent in 2009, more than six 
years ago.   
 
Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to timely pay his debts, future 
new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of some of his debts 
showed good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to 
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
continue making progress paying his remaining delinquent debts. His efforts are 
sufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Even if Applicant 
provided insufficient information to mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 20, he 
mitigated security concerns under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is a station 
mechanic at an isolated location. He spends eight months at the site and four months at 
home with his family. Applicant’s spouse handles their finances while he is at the 
remote site. His spouse neglected some of their bills. His spouse’s and children’s 
medical problems caused his delinquent debt. A coworker and two supervisors 
described him as honest, reliable, trustworthy, diligent, and dependable. Their 
statements support continuation of Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR establish a history of 13 delinquent debts 
totaling $17,642. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances by aggressively 
working to resolve his debts. He paid eight medical debts totaling $1,355, and in two 
years, he paid off a child-support debt of $5,581. He believes he paid the bank debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h for $3,034, and he is working on validating this debt. He promised to pay the 
delinquent debts on the SOR, and he is paying the medical debts first. He understands 
that he needs to pay his debts, and the conduct required to retain his security 
clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
 
8 
                                         
 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.2 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:  For Applicant  
 
  
                                            
2The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow [the applicant] the opportunity to have a security clearance while 
[the applicant] works on [his or] her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
 
9 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
