 
 
 
 
1 
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 14-05854 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including failing to timely file tax 
returns and pay delinquent taxes. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
financial security concerns and establish a track record of responsibly managing his tax 
obligations. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) as part of a re-investigation for his security clearance. 
On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
 
 
 
 
2 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within 
the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on April 6, 2015, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. On August 13, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On September 8, 2015, DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for September 25, 2015. The case 
proceeded as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence without objection. The record remained open 
until October 19, 2015, in order to provide Applicant time to submit additional 
documents. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 5, 2015. Applicant 
timely submitted six exhibits that I marked as AE E through J, and admitted into the 
record without objection. Department Counsel also requested admission of GE 6, a 
copy of Applicant’s bankruptcy petition. It is admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all four allegations contained in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He and his wife have been married for 27 years. He 
has one child and she has two children, all adults. Applicant’s 15-year-old grandson 
lives with them, as his mother (Applicant’s step-daughter) recently died. Applicant’s wife 
receives disability benefits. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 1974 until 
1977, and then inactive duty until 1980. He received an honorable discharge at the 
paygrade of E-4. He subsequently earned two associate’s degrees and a certificate 
from a technical institute. (Tr. 17-19, 22.) 
 
 In February 2014 Applicant began employment for as an over-the-road truck 
driver. Since 1988 he has worked for this contractor four different times for a total of 12 
years. (Tr. 20.) Prior to this job, he was employed by another company from August 
2012 to February 2014. From July 2007 to March 2012 he owned and operated a truck 
that he used for work. He has held a Secret security clearance since 2002, when he 
obtained it for employment with a different defense contractor. (GE 2.) 
 
 When Applicant completed his February 2014 e-QIP, he disclosed to the 
Government that he had not filed his 2011 and 2012 federal and state income tax 
returns. He indicated that he did not have enough money to pay the taxes that he 
anticipated owing, and that he intended to file them “this year.” (GE 1.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file Federal 
and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. He also admitted that he 
owed his state $2,825 for 2007 delinquent taxes and $2,262 for 2006 delinquent taxes. 
He stated that he thought the Chapter 7 bankruptcy he filed in 2011 resolved those 
unpaid state taxes. (Answer.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant admitted that he filed his Federal and state income tax returns for 
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 in April 2015.1 (Tr. 27.) He said he filed the 2011, 2012, 
and 2013 returns late because he believed he would receive a refund for some of those 
years and he needed that money to pay anticipated delinquent taxes. (Tr. 26, 28.) 
According to a September 21, 2015 notification from the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS), he owes $195 for delinquent taxes for 2011. (AE E.) In August 2015 his state 
notified him that he owed $1,037 for delinquent taxes from 2011. He paid the 2011 state 
tax bill on September 24, 2015. (AE H.) Based on information from the IRS, he received 
refunds from tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014. (AE A, B, C.)    
  
 Applicant has not resolved the state tax liens for 2006 and 2007. In a post-
hearing submission, he said that each lien is about $2,000, and that the state will not 
enforce the lien unless he owns property in the state or begins to make payments on it. 
He indicated that he spoke to a state’s revenue agent over the telephone about these 
liens. (AE F.)  
  
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. As part of an investigation for a 
security clearance in 2002, he was interviewed by a government investigator about 
delinquent debts and a previous delinquent Federal tax lien. He indicated that he 
resolved the debts discussed during that interview. (GE 5.)  
 
 In September 2011 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In December 2011 
the court entered a discharge order. It appears that court discharged about $261,737 of 
delinquent debts, which included a $188,000 mortgage, unpaid medical debts, car 
loans, and other debts. (GE 6.) He took a credit counseling course as a pre-requisite to 
filing the bankruptcy. (Tr. 26.)   
 
 During an interview with a government investigator in March 2014 regarding the 
reinvestigation for a security clearance, Applicant again discussed his financial 
problems. He stated that for the first two or three years after he and his wife purchased 
a truck in 2002, he drove as an independent contractor for a government contractor and 
easily met his financial obligations. Subsequently, the government reduced its contracts, 
resulting in a loss of income. In addition, gasoline increased to $4 per gallon, and he 
stopped earning enough money to afford the truck’s maintenance, gasoline costs, and 
living expenses. He also was supporting his step-children and a grandson for a long 
period of time. At some point, his wife stopped working with him. She is now disabled 
and receives disability benefits. (Tr. 39, 47; GE 2.) In April 2013 Applicant sold his truck 
and began working as an employee for companies. (Tr. 24.)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he has managed his finances poorly, but stated that 
he believes he has recently resolved most debts. He said that he and his wife have a 
                                            
1The SOR did not allege security concerns related to Applicant’s failure to timely file federal and state 
returns for 2013 or his 2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Hence, these facts will not be considered in an 
analysis of disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in an analysis of mitigating conditions and the 
whole-person concept. 
  
 
 
 
 
4 
budget, but that it is not written. (Tr. 26.) His wife handles all of the household finances 
because he is home only one weekend a month. He lives on $150 per week and all 
other money goes into the household budget. (Tr. 36-37.) Post-hearing, Applicant 
submitted a budget, which gives a brief overview of income and expenses.2 His family’s 
income, including his wife’s disability benefits, is about $4,625. The monthly household 
expenses are about $3,560, plus the $600 he uses for his personal expenses. There is 
less than $500 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 37; AE G.)  
 
 Applicant testified candidly and honestly. He does not use credit cards, tries to 
live within his means, and does not spend money he does not have. Working as an 
employee has allowed him to eliminate the high costs related to owning and driving his 
own truck. (Tr. 38-40.)  
 
 Applicant’s employer is aware that his financial problems created security 
clearance concerns. (Tr. 50.) A manager for his employer stated that Applicant performs 
his duties in a timely and professional manner. (AE I.) The director of safety for his 
employer stated that Applicant handles all confidential shipments appropriately. He said 
that Applicant is honest and trustworthy. (AE J.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                            
2Included in the 2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy is a copy of Applicant’s detailed budget. It recorded his net 
monthly income as $4,713, and numerous expenses related to owning and operating his truck used for 
employment. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes three disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Applicant failed to timely file Federal and state tax returns for 2011 and 2012. He 
has unpaid state tax liens for 2006 and 2007, which he is unable or unwilling to resolve. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise those disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced sufficient evidence of those three disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth four conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns in this case: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems began prior to 2006 and 2007 when he 
did not pay state income taxes, which resulted in unpaid tax liens and remain unpaid 
today. In 2011 he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy and discharged a substantial amount of 
delinquent debts. In April 2015 he filed his 2011, 2012, and 2013 tax returns, all of 
which were filed late. His tax issues have been ongoing for some time. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
Applicant stated that he failed to timely file income tax returns for 2011, 2012, 
and 2013 because he did not have enough money to pay the outstanding taxes. He 
explained that the expenses related to owning and operating a truck and supporting a 
family prevented him from paying taxes over those years. While some of these 
circumstances may have been beyond his control, they do not justify his failure to file 
income returns for those years, or to act responsibly by contacting the taxing bodies to 
establish a minimal payment plan. AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide mitigation.  
 
Applicant stated that he participated in credit counseling as a requirement for 
filing the 2011 bankruptcy. His written budget does not provide sufficient detail to 
determine whether he is able to meet all expenses or begin a repayment plan for the 
unpaid state taxes. It is unclear whether his finances are coming under control; thus, AG 
¶ 20(c) has limited application. Although he filed his Federal and state tax returns for 
 
 
 
 
7 
2011, 2012, and 2013 late, he is now current on his tax filings. This exhibited a good-
faith effort to resolve those issues, and supports the application of AG ¶ 20(d) as to the 
allegations related to failure to file tax returns. He has not made arrangements to 
resolve the unpaid state tax liens from 2006 or 2007; hence, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply 
to those allegations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent, articulate 60-
year-old man, who honorably served in the military for three years, and has worked for 
defense contractors periodically since 2002. His current employer provided favorable 
comments on his performance. He participated in the security clearance process in 
2002, and again in February 2014. During both investigations he discussed financial 
problems, including tax issues. His financial problems became more substantial in mid-
2000 when he owned and operated a truck he used for work, and experienced a 
decrease in income and increase in expenses. Those circumstances resulted in his 
2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and the discharge of $261,000 in delinquent debts. His state 
tax liens for 2006 and 2007 were not discharged in the bankruptcy and remain unpaid. 
While the amount of those liens is not substantial, Applicant’s history of not managing 
his tax obligations is concerning and raises questions about his reliability. At this time, 
he has not established a sufficient track record of responsibly handling his financial 
affairs. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:              For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:              Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
