                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-06001
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On April 28, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 2, 2015, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 29, 2015, and responded  to the FORM within
the time permitted with a documented retainer agreement with his bankruptcy attorney
and an accompanying statement of intent to petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief.
Applicant’s submission was admitted as Item 6. The case was assigned to me on
November 2, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four debts exceeding
$28,000, with two of the debts related to delinquent mortgages of $208,979 and
$74,231, respectively. Allegedly, each of the listed delinquent debts remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, he did not dispute any of the listed debts and
provided explanations as to how he and his wife fell behind with their debts while
Applicant was in short term disability status from surgical procedures. Applicant claimed
that he applied for and received short term disability benefits for nine weeks between
July 2012 and September 2012. He claimed he could not work out a deferred payment
plan with his homeowners association to avert foreclosure. And he claimed advice from
his bankruptcy attorney to defer petitioning for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief until after
mid-2015. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 54-year-old implementation manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in June 1989, divorced in May 1995, and  has one stepchild
from this marriage. (Item 2) He remarried in October 1997. (Items 1-3) Applicant has no
children from this marriage. Applicant enlisted in the Navy in November 1981 and
served 22 years of active duty. (Items 2-4) He earned his high school diploma in August
1979 and claimed no post-high school education. Applicant has been employed by his
current employer since 2004. (Items 2-3) He works part time with a local firm.
Finances
Applicant and his first wife purchased a town home in April 1998 and financed
their purchase with a $199,920 first mortgage. (Items 4-5) Records show he purchased
a new home in April 2005 for $245,000. (Items 4-5)  In February 2007, he obtained a
second mortgage on the new home with the same lender for $85,000. (Item 5) After
purchasing his second home, he retained the town home he purchased in 1998.
3
Following Applicant’s unsuccessful efforts to persuade his homeowners’
association to defer homeowners’ fees until his household income improved, his
homeowners’ association foreclosed on his town home in June 2013. (Item 1) Whether
the association completed foreclosure proceedings is uncertain.
Applicant is also listed as past due on his first and second mortgages with the
same listed creditor (creditors 1.a and 1.b) on his primary residence. He is listed as past
due in the amount of $5,142 on the first mortgage and $4,343 on the second mortgage.
(Items 4 and 5) Applicant has not paid anything on either of these accounts since
vacating the home in June 2013. While the lender has since started foreclosure
proceedings, it is not clear whether it completed them on either mortgage.  (Items 3-5)
Besides his mortgage and home owner’s debts, Applicant accrued two consumer
debts: one with creditor 1.c for $14,872 and one with creditor 1.d for $4,165.  (Items 4-
5) Both debts remain outstanding and unaddressed.
In his post-FORM submission, Applicant expressed his intention to petition for
Chapter 13 relief in October 2015 and attached a copy of a retainer agreement with his
bankruptcy attorney. (Item 6) To date, Applicant has not provided any follow-up
materials covering the petition, schedules, the court’s approved plan, and the final
discharge. Moreover, he did not provide any evidence of financial counseling or
budgeting.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no character references on his behalf, either with his answer
or with his response to the FORM.  Nor did he furnish any performance evaluations or
evidence of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
4
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
5
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed implementation manager for a defense contractor
who accumulated delinquent debts exceeding $28,000. Two of the listed debts
(creditors 1.c and 1.d) are charged off with no evidence of their being addressed by
Applicant. The remaining two creditors involve first and second mortgages with the
same creditor (i.e., creditors 1.a and 1.b). The record evidence confirms that Applicant
has made no payments on either mortgage since he vacated the home in 2013.
Whether the lender has completed foreclosure proceedings is unclear.
Applicant’s collective accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,”  apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed filing lapses and debts are fully documented in his credit reports.
Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s insufficiently explained accrual of
mortgage debts with his principal lender and other consumer creditors. To date, he
has taken insufficient corrective steps to resolve his delinquencies and demonstrate
he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3
(App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
6
Inferentially, Applicant’s delinquent debts are attributable for the most part to
income shortages and lapses in judgment in the management of his properties.
Without more information from Applicant about his debt delinquencies and the status
of any delinquencies on his mortgages, more detailed assessments cannot be made.
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating circumstances
are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise resolve her debts. Partially
available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibly.” 
What is not clear from this developed record are the specifics of Applicant’s
dispute with his home owners association that purportedly triggered not only
foreclosure initiation by his association, but his falling behind with his mortgages on
his personal residence and accruing his delinquencies with his two other listed
creditors. Without documentation of financial counseling and specific steps he has
taken to address his past-due debts, mitigation credit is not available to Applicant
based on the evidence developed in the record.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent mortgage and consumer
debts and failure to resolve them. Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a
critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his finances. 
While unanticipated financial burdens might have played a considerable role in
his failures to address his delinquent debts, Applicant failed to provide more specific
explanatory material for consideration. Endorsements and performance evaluations
might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall
clearance eligibility, but were not provided. 
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising
out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of mortgage and
consumer debts
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of delinquent mortgage and other consumer debt accumulations
and his lack of more specific explanations for his debt accruals and lack of
documented resolution of them, it is still too soon to make safe predictions of
Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily resolve his debts. 
More time is needed to facilitate’s Applicant’s making the necessary progress
with his creditors to facilitate conclusions that his finances are sufficiently stabilized to
permit him access to classified information. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d.  
7
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
