 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02722 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s Son], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 13, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
21, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 17, 2015. The hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 25, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since August 2013. She is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. She was born in another country. She came to the United States in 1971, and 
she became a U.S. citizen in 1982. She is a high school graduate. She is married with 
two adult children. She and her husband are estranged but live in the same home for 
financial reasons.1 
 
 Applicant’s husband developed significant health problems in about 2005. He did 
not have health insurance, and there were large medical expenses related to surgeries 
and other procedures. He has been unable to work since 2007. He did not start 
receiving Social Security disability benefits until 2009. Applicant had periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. When she worked, it was usually as a janitor or 
housekeeper. She and her husband struggled to pay their bills and relied upon credit 
cards. They were unable to keep up the payments, and a number of debts became 
delinquent.2 
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts, but the $270 debt alleged SOR ¶ 1.j is a 
duplicate account. The remaining 15 delinquent debts total about $10,965. Applicant 
admitted owing all but three of the debts, which she denied because the debts were 
“removed” from her credit report. All the debts are listed on a credit report obtained in 
December 2013.  
 
Applicant’s finances have improved since she obtained her current job. She 
retained a credit repair company in October 2014. She is able to pay her current debts 
without incurring new delinquent debts, but she has not been able to address her 
delinquent debts. None of the debts alleged in the SOR are listed on her September 
2015 combined credit report, as all or almost all of them are beyond the seven-year limit 
for reporting derogatory matter. Her plan is to proceed forward, pay her current bills, 
and maintain her financial stability.3 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
November 2013. She did not list any delinquent debts under the financial questions. 
She credibly denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. English is her second language, 
and she did not understand all the questions. She was forthcoming about her finances 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20, 23-26; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-21; Applicant’s Response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-21, 24-26; Applicant’s Response to SOR; GE 3; AE A, D. 
 
 
3 
 
when she was interviewed for her background investigation in January 2014.4 Having 
considered all the evidence, I find that she did not intentionally falsify the SF 86.  
 
 Applicant submitted letters attesting to her excellent job performance, reliability, 
responsibility, work ethic, trustworthiness, and dependability.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 17, 22-23; Applicant’s Response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
5 AE C. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were related to her husband’s medical problems that 
involved expensive medical procedures and left him unable to work since 2007. He did 
not start receiving Social Security disability benefits until 2009. Applicant had periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. Those events were beyond her control. 
 
Applicant’s finances have improved since she obtained her current job in August 
2013. She is able to pay her current debts without incurring new delinquent debts, but 
she has not been able to address her delinquent debts. None of the debts alleged in the 
SOR are listed on her September 2015 combined credit report, as all or almost all of 
them are beyond the seven-year limit for reporting derogatory matter. Her plan is to 
proceed forward, pay her current bills, and maintain her financial stability. 
 
 Relying on debts falling off a credit report because they are more than seven 
years old generally provides minimal mitigation and does not constitute a good-faith 
effort to pay debts. However, Applicant was presented with significant setbacks and little 
options for addressing her financial problems. She chose to move forward and pay her 
current bills. She finally has a job where she is appreciated and she earns a salary that 
enables her to pay her day-to-day living expenses.  
 
 Under the unique circumstances of this case, I find that Applicant acted 
responsibly. There are clear indications that her financial problems are under control. 
They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is only partially applicable because 
Applicant did not actually pay her debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on her SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
