1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-07003 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), dated June 1, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2015, admitting two and denying six of 
the eight financial allegations. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 
29, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on August 31, 2015. DOD issued a notice 
of hearing on October 23, 2015, scheduling a hearing for November 3, 2015. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered five exhibits that I marked 
and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 
5. Applicant testified and submitted four exhibits that I marked and admitted without 
objection into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through D. I 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 13, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor as a 
machinist since January 2014. He married in September 2001 and he has two children 
at home. Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $2,600. His wife contributes 
to the household income receiving approximately $2,100 in net monthly income, for a 
combined net monthly income of $4,700. The family monthly expenses are 
approximately $4,000. Applicant and his wife place $200 monthly in savings, and the 
remaining $500 is for discretionary expenses and payments. (Tr. 36-38; GX 1, e-QIP, 
dated April 25, 2014) 
 
The SOR alleges, and court documents (GX 3, dated March 3, 2012) confirm that 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2012 and his debts were discharged in 
June 2012 (SOR 1.a). The SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 4, dated May 17, 2014; 
GX 5, dated May 11, 2015), as well as Applicant’s discussion with a security 
investigator (GX 2, Personal Subject Interview Transcript, dated June 25, 2014) confirm 
the following medical debts in collection for $21,253 (SOR 1.b), $303 (SOR 1.c), $990 
(SOR 1.d), $116 (SOR 1.e), $1,930 (SOR 1.f), $274 (SOR 1.g), and $543 (SOR 1.h). All 
of the medical debts in collection are with the same collection agency except for the 
debt at SOR 1.f.  
 
Applicant was self-employed managing a small automobile repair business from 
2005 until 2012. Applicant was the sole employee and his wife helped him at times with 
administration of the business. They did not draw a salary but used the profits to pay 
family and personal expenses. In the beginning, the business did reasonably well. The 
business location was not in a main business area, so Applicant decided to move to a 
new location that would be better for his business. His business expenses increased. 
About the same time, the economy went down and Applicant did not have sufficient 
business to meet his expenses. He was using business credit cards and personal credit 
cards to pay his expenses and meet the family needs. When he could no longer make 
ends meet, Applicant consulted an attorney and filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy for his 
personal and business debts. (SOR 1.a) His business and personal debts resulting from 
3 
 
the business were discharged in June 2012. (Tr. 19-24, 44-48; GX 2, Personal Subject 
Interview, dated June 25, 2014; GX 3, Bankruptcy Court Documents, dated June 2012) 
 
Applicant and his family moved to his present location in 2012 after closing his 
business. He found work as a carpenter with a small company. The company did not 
provide health insurance and Applicant could not afford a private health insurance 
policy. In January 2013, Applicant became sick requiring hospitalization and he incurred 
a large hospital debt. The remaining debts in the SOR are a result of the medical debts 
and total approximately $28,000.  
 
The hospital took a few months to tally all of his bills before asking Applicant for 
payment. When he received the bill, he tried to work with the hospital to get relief or set 
up a reasonable payment plan. He was advised by hospital administrators that he did 
not qualify for any of their debt reduction programs. He offered to pay $200 monthly on 
the debt, but the only payment plan they offered was for $500 monthly. Applicant could 
not afford this level of monthly payment. The hospital turned over all of the debts to a 
collection agency. 
 
It took the collection agency a few months to get in contact with Applicant after 
receiving the debts from the hospital. The collection agency consolidated most of the 
debts into one large debt as reflected in SOR 1.b. There were still small debts that were 
not consolidated and were outstanding. One debt (SOR 1.f) was sent to a different 
collection agency. Applicant negotiated with the collection agency holding most of the 
debts to reach a payment plan that he could afford. After extensive discussions, they 
agreed on a plan in May 2015. Applicant and the collection agency agreed to a monthly 
payment plan of $100. Applicant has been making these payments since June 2015. 
The collection agency has been paying the debts starting with the smallest one first. 
The collection agency has also made some payments towards the largest debt at SOR 
1.b. Applicant provided documents in his response to the SOR that the debts at SOR 
1.c, 1.e, and 1.g have been paid in full and resolved by the collection agency. He also 
provided documentation that the debts at SOR 1.d and 1.h are now being paid by the 
collection agency. (AX A, B, and C, Account Statements, various dates)  
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan for the debt listed at SOR 1.f held by the 
other collection agency. He pays that collection agency $50 a month on the debt. (AX D, 
Statement, dated October 1, 2015) Applicant’s debts are paid or being paid. (Tr. 24-35, 
30-44, 52-57; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated June 25, 2014)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
5 
 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations.  
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant had financial difficulties after his 
small business failed, he moved, and became ill requiring hospitalization without the 
benefit of health insurance. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is documented in his 
credit reports and his OPM interview, and his testimony at the hearing. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are a security concern. The evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates an inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), and (d) apply. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt after his small business failed and he had to file a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving debt. Applicant’s 
financial situation from his failed small business was correctly resolved by bankruptcy 
discharge. Applicant incurred other delinquent debt when he became ill and required 
hospitalization. He did not have health insurance at the time. Hospital and medical 
debts will not recur since Applicant is working for an employer who provides excellent 
health insurance coverage. His illness and his lack of health insurance were conditions 
beyond his control. He has acted reasonably under the circumstance. He contacted the 
6 
 
hospital when he received his bill. He tried to negotiate a payment plan that he could 
afford. He was unsuccessful and the hospital turned the debt over to collection agency. 
Applicant worked with the collection agency to negotiate a reasonable payment plan.  
 
Applicant established his good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-faith 
effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of 
handling debts is needed. Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay 
delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner 
and acting in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish that he has a 
reasonable plan to resolve financial problems and has taken significant action to 
implement that plan. Applicant has established a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. He presented supporting information that he has payment plans with two 
collection agencies. Under one of the plans, he presented sufficient information that 
three of the debts have been paid (SOR 1.c, 1.e, and 1.g), and three debts are being 
paid under the payment plan (SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h). One debt (SOR 1.f) is being paid 
under a payment plan to the other collection agency. By paying and being current with 
his debts, Applicant has shown that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, 
and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his finances. 
 
Applicant has shown that he is managing his personal financial obligations 
reasonably and responsibly, and his financial problems are behind him. There is ample 
evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based on all of the 
financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns based 
on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
due to conditions beyond his control. He presented evidence that he paid or is paying 
his debts under agreed payment plans. This information shows Applicant’s responsible 
management of his finances. Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that 
he acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances, and that he will continue to 
responsibly manage his financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
