 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04592 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On January 3, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 20, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant, and she received it on August 7, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 2 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant did not provide additional evidence and the record 
closed. The case was assigned to me on December 9, 2015.  
 
Procedural matters 
 
 On December 10, 2015, I requested Department Counsel provide me with a copy 
of the original SOR. I also inquired whether he intended to provide administrative notice 
documents regarding the Guideline B, foreign influence allegations in the SOR. 
Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline B allegations and provided me the original 
SOR.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶ ¶ 1.a and 1.b. She partially admitted 
the allegation in ¶ 2.a with an explanation and denied ¶ 2.b. I have incorporated her 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. She was married from 1982 to 1989 and from 2001 to 
2006. She has a 13-year-old child from her second marriage. She earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 1987 and a management certificate in 1995. She has worked for federal 
contractors since 1999, and her present employer, a federal contractor, since 2007. She 
has held a security clearance since 2003.2 
 
Applicant was born in Brazil and moved to the United States in 1983. She 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1988. Applicant holds dual 
citizenship with Brazil. She has not renounced her citizenship with Brazil. She has 
maintained a Brazilian passport for many years. In 2007, she renewed her Brazilian 
passport. In August 2008, as part of her background reinvestigation for her security 
clearance, Applicant surrendered her Brazilian passport and it was shredded by her 
employer. During her background interview in September 2008, Applicant indicated she 
maintained dual citizenship with Brazil because it was easier to travel using a Brazilian 
passport. At that time, she indicated she was willing to renounce her Brazilian 
citizenship.3  
 
After destruction of her Brazilian passport, Applicant was granted a top secret 
security clearance in November 2008. In November 2009, Applicant applied for and was 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2 and 4. 
 
3 
 
 
issued a new Brazilian passport. She used the Brazilian passport to travel to Brazil to 
visit family in 2009, 2011, 2012 and 2013. Although her foreign travel to Brazil was 
approved by her employer, there is no evidence to substantiate that she disclosed to 
her employer that she had obtained a new Brazilian passport and that she was using it 
to travel there. During her five year periodic reinvestigation for her security clearance in 
2013, Applicant acknowledged that she used her Brazilian passport to travel from 2009 
through 2013, which was subsequent to being granted a top secret security clearance. 
There is no evidence she disclosed this information to her employer prior to the 
reinvestigation. On her October 2013 security clearance application (SCA) she wrote: “I 
shall provide my [Brazilian] passport to my Security Officer for safekeeping, as 
necessary.”4 In 2014, Applicant retrieved the passport from the facility security officer 
and used it to travel to Brazil while accompanying her elderly mother.5 
 
On Applicant’s October 2013 SCA she wrote:  
 
I surrendered my previous [Brazilian] passport-it was shredded 8/2008 by 
[federal contractor employer]. I looked into renouncing the Brazilian 
citizenship, but was told at the [Brazilian] consulate [it] was a complicated 
and protracted process. Also, that renouncing citizenship may hinder 
future travel to that country, as I have my family living there.6 
 
During Applicant’s background interview in December 2013, she reiterated that 
she maintains dual citizenship with Brazil because renunciation is a difficult and long 
process. She indicated renouncing her Brazilian citizenship is not an option because 
she travels to Brazil regularly to visit her family. Her most recent Brazilian passport 
expired in November 2014. Applicant did not provide information as to whether she 
renewed it.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Item 2 page 50; Answer to SOR. An email dated September 22, 2014, which is included as part of 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, indicates the facility security officer was holding Applicant’s Brazilian 
passport.  
 
5 Item 2; Answer to SOR.  
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen.  
 
 Applicant applied for and was issued a Brazilian passport after becoming a 
naturalized citizen of the United States. She has repeatedly used her Brazilian passport 
to travel to Brazil. It is unknown whether she has a current Brazilian passport. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant exercised dual citizenship when she repeatedly renewed her Brazilian 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and used it to travel to Brazil. She has not 
expressed a willingness to renounce her dual citizenship. There is no evidence that her 
use of the Brazilian passport was approved by a cognizant security authority. It is 
alleged that her passport expired in November 2014. I have not been provided 
evidence to substantiate that that passport expired, and it is unknown if she renewed it. 
None of the above mitigating condition applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
6 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
In 2008, as part of Applicant’s reinvestigation for her security clearance eligibility, 
it was learned that she held a current Brazilian passport and used it repeatedly to travel 
to Brazil. It is unknown whether she previously had reported that she held a Brazilian 
passport. She surrendered that passport, whereupon it was shredded, and she 
expressed a willingness to renounce her dual citizenship with Brazil. She was 
subsequently issued a top secret security clearance. At that time, Applicant was on 
notice that holding a foreign passport prohibited her from holding a top secret security 
clearance. In 2009, she reapplied for a Brazilian passport, did not inform her security 
manager of her actions, and subsequently used the passport to travel to Brazil. She did 
not disclose this information to her employer until October 2013 as part of the 
reinvestigation for her top secret security clearance. Although her employer was aware 
of her foreign travel, there is no evidence that she disclosed she was using a foreign 
passport for the travel. Applicant had a duty to report this information. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating condition 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant had a duty to disclose that she had applied for and was issued a new 
Brazilian passport in 2009. When she disclosed her foreign travel to her employer, there 
is no evidence she disclosed that she would be using a foreign passport for her travel. 
She did not disclose that she had obtained a new Brazilian passport in 2009 and used it 
to travel, until 2013 during the reinvestigation for a top secret security clearance. She 
stated she was required to obtain a Brazilian passport because of her dual citizenship 
status in order to travel to Brazil to visit family. Applicant may renounce her citizenship 
with Brazil and travel on her U.S. passport, but has chosen not to go through the 
process. Her conduct was not minor because she actively sought to circumvent the 
rules after being granted a top secret security clearance. There is considerable 
circumstantial evidence to conclude that Applicant was aware after the destruction of 
her Brazilian passport in 2008 that she could not possess an active foreign passport, 
use it to travel, and continue to hold a top secret security clearance. The above 
mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. She immigrated to the United States from Brazil and 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1989. She maintains dual 
citizenship with Brazil. She has exercised her rights as a Brazilian citizen by obtaining 
 
8 
 
 
and renewing her Brazilian passport for travel there. In 2008, she surrendered her 
Brazilian passport and it was destroyed. At the time, she indicated her willingness to 
renounce her Brazilian citizenship. She was granted a top secret security clearance. In 
2009, she subsequently obtained a new Brazilian passport and used it to travel to Brazil 
until 2013. There is no evidence she disclosed this information to her facility security 
manager at the time she renewed and received it. She waited until October 2013 when 
she was reinvestigated for her security clearance eligibility. There is sufficient evidence 
to conclude that Applicant intentionally circumvented the security clearance process. 
She has not met her burden of persuasion. Her conduct raises serious questions about 
her trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline C, foreign preference, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a (1) and (2): Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
