KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings satisfy the requirements of the Directive for factual
sufficiency.  Applicant did not rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  Comments in the interview summary do not represent the opinions of the interviewer
as to Applicant’s security eligibility.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-06293.a1
DATE: 01/13/2016
DATE: January 13, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06293
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 4, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 15, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, the majority of which were in collection or
charged-off status.  Applicant has paid some of her debts, including one owed to the IRS.  However,
the Judge entered adverse formal findings on twelve debts alleged in the SOR.  Applicant attributed
her problems to a period of unemployment in 2011 occasioned by a government shutdown, to her
son’s medical problems, and to a period of separation from her husband.  
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in January 2015.  Her unsecured
nonpriority claims, totaling nearly $64,000, included a student loan, personal loans from a bank or
credit union, medical debts, insurance costs, a deficiency from the sale of a repossessed vehicle, etc.
Applicant received the required credit counseling, advising that she gained “valuable insight into
managing her finances.”  Decision at 2.  She also took a 13-week course provided by a financial
education program.  Applicant’s debts were discharged in June 2015.  
As of 2014, Applicant and her husband had a combined income of nearly $98,000, up from
the previous year’s total of a little over $83,000.  As of September 2015, her average checking
account balance was $3,364, and her savings account balance was $1,198.  Applicant enjoys an
excellent reputation for her work ethic, organization, knowledge, trustworthiness, and honesty.
Applicant’s performance appraisals rate her as “fully successful,” “highly successful,” or
“exceptional.”  Id. at 3.  She is involved in church and community activities. She has earned awards
and recognitions for her duty performance.
The Judge’s Analysis
Though noting that Applicant’s financial problems were affected by circumstances outside
her control, the Judge stated that Applicant did not provide information about what efforts she took
to resolve her debts before resorting to bankruptcy.  She cited to evidence that Applicant’s and her
husband’s combined incomes increased from 2013 to 2014, yet she did not pay her creditors.  The
Judge stated that Applicant has worked steadily since resuming her employment in 2011, and she
and her husband reconciled in that year also.  The Judge stated that, insofar as it had been only five
months since Applicant’s discharge in bankruptcy, it was too soon to tell if there are clear
indications that her financial problems are behind her.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant did not explain what action she
took to resolve her debts.  Despite her bankruptcy discharge, the Judge concluded that insufficient
time had elapsed to establish a track record of sound financial strategy.  
Discussion
1As stated above, the Judge found that Applicant’s debts included a student loan.  Applicant states that she
herself does not have any student loans and that, in any event, “student loans are not permitted to be included in
bankruptcy.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  The Judge’s finding about the student loan appears to have been based on Item 7,
Bankruptcy Petition.  On page 50 of this document, “Sallie Mae” is listed under Schedule F, Creditors Holding
Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, as a creditor to whom a debt for a “student loan” is owed in the amount of $12,707.  The
Bankruptcy Petition was signed by both Applicant and her husband.  We note that Item 8, Bankruptcy Discharge, at page
2, states that “[d]ebts for most student loans” are not discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Even if the Judge erred by
not including this exception  in her findings, it did not harm Applicant.  Therefore, assuming arguendo that the Judge
erred in this matter, it is harmless.     
3
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  We conclude that the Judge’s
material findings of security concern are supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same
record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.1  
Applicant cites to her favorable evidence, such as the circumstances outside her control that
influenced her problems, her statement that she pays her current bills, her reliance upon the advice
of counsel in deciding to pursue bankruptcy, her having obtained credit counseling, etc.  The Judge
made findings about the evidence that Applicant cites in her Appeal Brief.  She discussed much of
this evidence in the Analysis portion of the Decision.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).
Applicant disagrees with the Judge’s comment that insufficient time has passed to show that
she is in control of her finances.  She also states that she has been candid in her presentation of her
financial difficulties and the reasons underlying them.  Applicant’s appeal argument is, in essence,
a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not enough to show that the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.   See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-04202 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 24, 2015).  Moreover, we conclude that the Judge’s
whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of the Directive, in that she evaluated
Applicant’s security significant conduct in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-02806 at 4 (App.  Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).  
Applicant cites to a comment in Item 6, Person Subject Interview Summary, to the effect that
there is nothing in her background that could subject her to coercion or blackmail.  This represents
the interviewer’s summary of Applicant’s statements during the interview, not the interviewer’s
opinion of Applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03069 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul.
30, 2015).      
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not provided enough evidence to meet her
burden of persuasion as to mitigation is supportable.  Insofar as the Applicant bears the burden of
persuasion that he or she should have a clearance (Directive ¶ E3.1.15), a Judge can legitimately
point to a paucity of mitigating evidence in support of an adverse decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-02632 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015)(The Judge’s adverse decision based in large part upon an
4
absence of evidence to show mitigation).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
