                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )         ISCR  Case No.  14-06429         
                                                             )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On May 11, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on July 22, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on August 7, 2015.
At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on August 12, 2015.     
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments to
individual creditors and determine whether any deficiency balance exists in connection
with Applicant’s home foreclosure sale. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded seven days to
respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a brief
explanation of his unsuccessful efforts to obtain documented payment summaries, lease
and payment documentation, and updates on the status of his foreclosure. Applicant’s
post-hearing submission is admitted as AE C. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated 17 delinquent debts
exceeding $168,000 and (b) incurred a mortgage loan foreclosure in September 2012
with no indication of any deficiency balance after public sale of the property.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted 10 debts and denied 11 debts. He
claimed he paid (creditors 1.a-1.b, 1.e, 1.j-1.k, and 1.p), disputed the amounts alleged in
subparagraphs in 1.m and 1.r (duplication), and in 1.t, set up payment plans with creditors
1.d, 1.m, and 1.s, and plans to set up a payment plan with creditor 1.f.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old software engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in July 1999 and has a child and two stepchildren from this
marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 47)  He attended college between September 1979 and May 1984
and earned a bachelor’s degree in geology in May 1984. (GE 1) He returned to college in
September 2011 and earned a master’s degree in computer science in May 2013. (GE 1;
Tr. 50, 52) Applicant claimed no military service.
Applicant has worked for his current employer since November 2013 as a software
engineer. (GE 1) Between May 2013 and November 2013, he was unemployed. (GEs 1
and 4; Tr. 51) He worked part-time for a state government agency between September
2012 and May 2013.  Between August 2011 and August 2012 he was unemployed and
3
with little income while enrolled in graduate school. (GE 1; Tr. 33) And prior to his return
to graduate school, he worked as a petroleum analyst (from March 2007 to July 2011).
Applicant’s finances
Applicant admitted some of his debts and denied others. He has since satisfied
some of the listed debts by payment in full, others with payment plans, and three of his
student loan defaults by a consolidation agreement with the U.S. Department of
Education (DOE).  Applicant attributes his debt deficiencies to income shortages resulting
from his returning to school and his wife’s disability that prevented her from working. (GEs
1 and 4; Tr. 29-33)   
Records show that Applicant and his wife purchased their home in September
2008 for around $125,000 and financed their purchase with a $118,000 first mortgage
with creditor 1.c. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 45) At the time, Applicant was fully employed as a
petroleum analyst (i.e., March 2007-July 2011). (GE 1; Tr. 33) His finances changed
considerably after he left his employment for graduate school in September 2011. (GE 1;
Tr. 50-51)  Once he returned to school, he could no longer afford the mortgage payments,
and his wife could not make the payments while out of work. (GE 4; Tr. 42) After
Applicant defaulted on he loan and failed to enlist creditor 1.c’s short sale approval
without meeting the lender’s back payment demands, creditor 1.c foreclosed on the
residence in September 2012. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 43, 48-49) 
Credit reports do not reflect any deficiency from the public sale of Applicant’s
residence, which Applicant indicated produced around $30,000 in sales proceeds. (Tr.
Applicant assured he has heard nothing from creditor 1.c about any owed deficiency
balance.  (Tr. 39) With home values generally in retreat nationally between 2008 and
2010, it is questionable whether creditor 1.c was able to recoup its loan investment from
the sale of the property alone in 2012. But to date, both credit records and Applicant’s
accounts do not reflect any deficiency demands on Applicant. With no demands placed
on Applicant for the payment of a deficiency, none can be attributed to Applicant
To finance his undergraduate education, Applicant obtained federally guaranteed
student loans. (GEs 2-4)  Credit records reveal that Applicant secured student loans with
creditor 1.g for $23,352; with  creditor 1.h for $29,803; and with creditor 1.i for $29,314.
(GEs 2-3) Applicant was successful with consolidating his loans with DOE in June 2015,
but only to August 7, 2015. (AE A; Tr. 51-57) Repayment was scheduled to begin
immediately following the expiration of the  last forbearance unless Applicant was able to
obtain additional forbearance relief. (AE A) Monthly repayment terms were set at $611 a
month. (AE A) Applicant provided no evidence of his obtaining any further forbearance
relief or making payments under the terms of his last forbearance. Applicant’s
consolidated student loans with creditors 1.g-1.i remain unresolved.  
In June 2011, Applicant purchased a vehicle from creditor 1.j for $8,089. (GEs 2-4)
While in school with little income, he involuntarily returned the vehicle to the lender. (Tr.
36-37) A deficiency remained after the sale of the vehicle in the amount of $8,398. (GEs
4
2-4) Creditor1.j later filed a garnishment suit against Applicant and enforced its suit with
four to five involuntary payments. (AE H; Tr. 38-39) Applicant documented his resolution
of the garnishment suit with creditor 1.j in March 2015 by satisfaction of the balance owed
with funds from his employment bonus. (Tr. 39) Thereafter, the creditor dismissed its
garnishment suit. (AE H; Tr. 30-31, 37-38) 
Of the remaining listed debts, Applicant documented his payments of the following
debts: creditor 1.a with a $250 payment; creditor 1.b with a $70 payment; creditor 1.e with
a $305 payment; creditor 1.k with a $74 payment; creditor 1.p with a $189 payment; and
creditor 1.s with $595 payment plan. (AE A; Tr. 31, 40-41, 53, and 69-70) Applicant
settled another debt with a payment plan with creditor 1.d on an $857 balance and a
documented $100 first payment. (AE A; Tr. 52-53, 59)
Applicant disputed two of the listed debts in the SOR. He disputed the listed debts
with creditors 1.m and 1.r on a $1,415 balance over a claimed duplication. (GEs 2-4;
Tr.60-61) His duplication dispute is a reasonable one made in good faith and is accepted.
Applicant also disputed the listed debt with creditor 1.q (a $2,281 debt with his landlord),
claiming he did not owe the landlord any money. Afforded an opportunity to document his
lease agreement and payments made, Applicant did not do so. Without more evidence to
verify Applicant’s claims, Applicant’s dispute with this creditor is too incomplete to
validate.
Finally, Applicant disputed the debt covered by subparagraph 1.t (a $3,134 alleged
debt) He disputed this debt on age grounds but provided no documentation of making his
dispute known to the credit bureaus or the creditor. (GEs 2-3) The account was reported
in Applicant’s May 2014 credit report (GE 2) as 180 days past due April 2014. Without
more evidence from Applicant, the debt does not appear too aged to be barred by
Applicant’s State’s pertinent statute of limitations. Based on the evidence provided,
Applicant’s dispute of the creditor 1.t debt is not well supported by the evidence.
The remaining debts listed in the SOR are unresolved and outstanding. Debts
owed to creditors 1.f (1,117); 1.l (a $55,286, student loan co-signed by Applicant for his
daughter); 1.m ($1,114); 1.o ($993), and 1.q ($2,281) remain outstanding and unresolved.
(GEs 2-4) Any deficiency balance that may be owed to creditor 1.c is not documented and
cannot be attributed to Applicant on the basis of the evidence presented. (GEs 2-4; Tr.
35-36, 60)
To date, Applicant has paid or resolved debts with creditors holding approximately
$10,740 in delinquent accounts and is credited with good-faith disputes on two of his
accounts (creditors 1.c and 1.r). This leaves over $63,000 in unpaid debts that he is
legally responsible for out of the $165,000 allegedly owed to the creditors alleged in the
SOR. His federally guaranteed student loans (creditors 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i) are in
forbearance through August 7, 2015, and are exposed to likely to default as well after
August 7, 2015, and add an additional $55,000 to Applicant’s accrual of unresolved
delinquent debts.. To date, he has not pursued any financial counseling or set up any
budgets for administering to his debts.
5
Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to obtain a forbearance extension to carry him
past the expiration date of August 7, 2015, Applicant did not provide any documented
proof of an extension. Without an extension, his scheduled $611 monthly payments were
due to commence in August 2015. (AE A) Applicant furnished no documentation either of
any payments on his consolidated student loan, and is now past due, or close to past-due
status in his loan payments. His scheduled loan payments currently total in excess of
$74,634. (AE A) Combined with his other unpaid debts, Applicant’s outstanding debts
exceed $137,000. Should Applicant be unable to obtain any further forbearance of his
student plans, he will not have the income to make his scheduled $611 monthly payments
and will need to renegotiate his student loan payments with the creditor. (Tr. 76)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by his software managers. (AE B) He is recognized by
his program managers as his department’s lead software manager responsible for
assuring the handling and development of classified hardware. Applicant is credited with
a high level of responsibility in producing and ensuring that classified software and
documentation is handled correctly. (AE B) Applicant’s direct supervisor considers
Applicant to be a valuable asset to the firm’s programs under DOD contracts. (AE B)
                Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
6
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
7
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts. His
delinquent debts include his defaulted student loans and his delinquent medical and
consumer debts. While some of the listed debts have been paid, or otherwise resolved,
some have not and remain outstanding. 
Applicant’s student loan and other listed delinquent obligations accumulated
obligations over a four-year period (2010-2015) warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs:  DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,”apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts, inclusive of matured student loan
obligations, medical, and consumer debts merit application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” Financial hardships associated with his periods of recurrent
unemployment since returning to school in 2011, (partially associated with the economic
downturn) and his corresponding loss of income are extenuating with respect to the
debts he incurred during periods of income contraction. His recurrent hardships account
for his continuing to accumulate tax and consumer debt delinquencies while fully
employed.    
Based on the evidence presented, Applicant has made some gains in addressing
his delinquent debts, satisfying his outstanding debts, and undertaking efforts to
stabilize his finances. His debt repayment and settlement efforts over this past year
have produced over $10,000 in payoffs, payment plans, and opportunities to work with
8
his student loan lenders in structuring a payment plan on his consolidated student loan
that he can handle with his current income sources. At the present time, though,
Applicant’s repayment efforts entitle him to few mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.”  For to date, he has provided no evidence of any forbearance extensions,
workable repayment plans, or documented monthly payments on his student loans.
Debt reductions on his student loans have been negligible so far, and the balances are
large: over $74,000 on his own loans and over $55,000 on the loans he co-signed on
his parent-plus loan for his daughter.
Prospects for Applicant’s establishing and maintaining student loan payment
plans with his student loan lenders are uncertain. Between the $74,000 owing on his
own student loan and the more than $55,000 owing on his co-signed parent-plus loan
for his daughter, Applicant still holds more than $129,000 in delinquent student debts.
Without evidence of financial counseling and workable repayment plans, Applicant’s
chances for stabilizing his finances are uncertain at best. Under these circumstances,
application of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control,” is not available to Applicant .
With his shortage of available income, Applicant is not able to demonstrate the
level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by the Appeal Board
for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his financial condition with responsible
efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 29, 2009). 
Establishing a meaningful track record of debt reduction does not require the
satisfaction of every listed debt in the SOR. But it does require an established plan, or
plan, for resolving his debts and taking significant steps to implement that plan, or plans.
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) This, Applicant has not
been able to achieve to date with his payment efforts.  
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’s demonstrated repayment efforts
are not substantial enough to overcome security concerns associated with his history of
financial instability, dating to 2011, when he returned to school and was unemployed.
Applicant’s struggles with unemployment and corresponding reduced income are
extenuating to a point. His efforts to repay his creditors through direct payments and
repayment agreements are somewhat encouraging, but insufficient to restore his
finances to stable levels consistent with meeting minimum requirements for holding a
security clearance.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts (student loan, medical, and consumer debts), and his insufficient
demonstration of repayment initiatives with payoffs and workable repayment plans, his
corrective efforts are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
9
some of the allegations covered by Guideline F. Applicant is entitled to favorable
conclusions on others.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.f-1.i, and 1.l-1.o, 1.q, and
      1.t:                                               Against  Applicant
Subparas. 1.a-1.e, 1.j-1.k, 1.p, and                 
      1.r-1.s:                                         For Applicant
      C  o   n  c  l u  s  i o  n s         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
