 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06739   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Correales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file federal income tax returns for the years 2008 
through 2011. He was indebted to a state for a tax lien filed in 2012 for 2008 taxes. He 
intentionally did not disclose his failure to file those taxes on his security clearance 
application. He did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial or personal 
conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 15, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) 
for investigation. On June 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2015, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
August 26, 2015, Department Counsel mailed Applicant a copy of its written case. 
Applicant received the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, on 
September 1, 2015. The FORM stated that Applicant had 30 days from its receipt to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
and timely returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), along 
with additional information, which consisted of a letter in response to the Department’s 
FORM, and four attachments. I marked the letter as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and the 
attachments as AE A (1) through (4). All Items and exhibits are admitted into the record 
without an objection from either party. DOHA assigned the case to me on October 19, 
2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the June 2015 SOR, Applicant denied the allegations contained 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 2.) His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings.  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and married for 29 years. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 1998. He has worked for federal contractors since the mid 1990’s and his 
current employer since 2008. (Item 3.) He has held a security clearance since 1994. 
(Item 5.) 
 
 When he completed his June 2012 SF-86 for re-investigation, Applicant failed to 
disclose to the Government that he had not filed his 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 federal 
and state income tax returns.1  (Item 3.) During a personal interview with a government 
investigator in October 2012 regarding information in the SF-86, he “volunteered” 
information about his failure to file federal and state returns for said years. (Item 5.) He 
explained he did not disclose the omissions because he was embarrassed about his 
actions and attributed the omissions to his laziness. When confronted about an 
outstanding 2008 state tax lien that was filed in May 2012, he indicated that he was 
unaware of it. He stated that he told his accountant about the unfiled tax returns in early 
2012 and that he was in the process of filing them. (Item 5.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant again admitted that he failed to disclose that 
he had not filed federal and state income tax returns for years 2008 through 2011. He 
stated that he regretted his actions. (Item 2.) In his response letter to the FORM, he 
                                                 
1 The SOR did not allege security concerns related to Applicant’s failure to timely file federal returns for 
2012 and 2013, or any of his state returns from 2008 to 2013. Hence, these facts will not be considered in 
an analysis of disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in an analysis of mitigating conditions and 
the whole-person concept. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
quoted his statement to the investigator regarding his embarrassment and laziness as 
the reason for not filing his returns. (AE A.)   
 
 Applicant filed his 2008 state tax return in October 2012.2 He subsequently was 
notified by the state that after calculating an abatement, he did not owe $19,401 for the 
tax year, but had overpaid the taxes in the amount of $9,901. (AE A (1.)) The lien is 
resolved. 
  
 Applicant submitted copies of his federal and state tax returns for 2008 through 
2011. (AE A (1) through (4).) He stated in his answer to the SOR and response to the 
FORM that he filed all of said tax returns. The 2008 return includes his signature and a 
date of October 20, 2012. However, none of the other federal or state returns are signed 
or dated by him or his accountant. There is no evidence in the record verifying the date 
he filed those returns. 
 
 Applicant also submitted copies of his 2007, 2012, and 2013 federal and state 
income tax returns, which are unsigned, undated, and do not provide proof of filing. He 
provided copies of his 2014 federal and state tax returns, which were signed by his 
accountant and dated September 12, 2015. He had received a filing extension for the 
2014 returns. (AE A (1) through (4).) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
                                                 
2 In his response letter to the FORM, Applicant stated that he filed his 2008 state income tax return on 
October 20, 2015, which resulted in the receipt of a tax abatement on January 11, 2013. Clearly, he filed 
the return in October 2012, and not in 2015, which was a clerical error. (AE A.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual federal, state or local income tax returns as 
required. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems, specifically failing to timely file federal tax returns, 
began in 2008 and extended through the tax year for 2011. Until recently he has been 
unwilling to fully and timely resolve his tax obligations. The evidence raises the above 
security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant asserted that he has filed all of his delinquent federal and state tax 
returns. Because he failed to timely file returns for at least four consecutive tax years, 
2008 to 2011, and seemingly only recently filed some of them, he did not demonstrate 
that such problems are unlikely to recur. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing 
his income tax obligations remain a concern. The evidence does not support the 
application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant did not provide any evidence that circumstances beyond his control 
contributed to his delinquent filings. In fact, he admitted that his omissions were due to 
laziness and embarrassment. AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide mitigation. There is no 
evidence that he participated in financial counseling, although he sought professional 
assistance with preparing some of the tax returns. Based on his four-year history of 
failing to timely file required tax returns, there are minimal indications that his tax 
problems are fully under control; thus, AG ¶ 20(c) has little application. There is some 
 
 
6 
 
 
evidence that he timely filed his 2014 federal and state returns, demonstrating that he 
made a good-faith effort to comply with the law for that year. Given his history of 
delinquent filings, AG ¶ 20(d) has no application to the allegations regarding his failure 
to timely file tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2011. However, there is sufficient 
evidence to determine that Applicant has resolved the 2008 tax lien. AG ¶ 20(d) applies 
to that allegation. There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he intentionally failed to disclose his unfiled income tax 
returns for years 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 in his June 2012 SF-86. The evidence 
raises the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
In October 2012 Applicant voluntarily disclosed to a government investigator that 
he had not filed his federal and state tax returns for 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011. 
However, waiting until an investigative interview to disclose requested information is not 
considered a prompt or good-faith effort to correct an omission. AG ¶ 17(a) does not 
provide mitigation for the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. There is no evidence to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 17(b) because Applicant’s concealment of the information was 
not based on improper advice from a professional. His failure to timely file returns for 
more than four years is not a minor infraction; hence, AG ¶ 17(c) does not provide 
mitigation. Although Applicant acknowledged his intentional misconduct, which was 
based on embarrassment and laziness, he did not submit sufficient evidence that he 
has established steps to avoid similar conduct in the future. AG ¶ 17(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 55 years old. He 
has been employed by a defense contractor since the mid-1990s. Despite having gone 
 
 
8 
 
 
through the security clearance process in the past and having been granted a security 
clearance, he chose not to timely file federal and state income tax returns for the years 
2008 through 2013. Although he supplied copies of his state and federal tax returns for 
the years 2007 through 2014, which he asserted are now filed, he failed to verify the 
date on which the returns were filed. Even with proof of filing, it is clear that most of 
those returns were filed late with the possible exception of 2007 and 2014. While 
Applicant is apologetic for his conduct, he intentionally chose not to disclose his 
delinquent tax returns.  Having eventually revealed his tax problems to the Government 
during a background interview in 2012, he repeated his conduct by not timely filing 
returns for tax years 2012 and 2013. He asserted in his response to the FORM that he 
filed the tax returns, but it took him months and years to correct the situation. The 
likelihood that similar problems will continue is significant.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial considerations 
and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
           Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
