 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-05978
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his drug use. However, doubts
about his suitability for clearance, raised by his deliberate false official statements to the
Government, remain. His request for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 7, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On April 9, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline
H (Illegal Drugs).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision2
without a hearing. 
On June 26, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR.3
Applicant received the FORM on August 26, 2015, and was advised he had 30 days
from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM.
Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM and the case
was assigned to me on October 27, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana
between 2007 and late 2012 or early 2013 (SOR 1.a). Under Guideline E, it was alleged
that Applicant deliberately made three false official statements in his EQIP when he
failed to disclose the marijuana use alleged in SOR 1.a (SOR 2.a), or that he was
arrested in 2008 for drunk and disorderly conduct (SOR 2.b), and that he was charged
with operating (a motor vehicle) under the influence of liquor in March 2005 (SOR 2.c).
(FORM, Item 1)
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations therein. (FORM,
Item 2) In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked as a welder since November 2013. He has never been married and has no
children. Applicant is a recovering alcoholic. He abused alcohol in a significant and
addictive way from the time he was 16 years old. At one point, he was drinking so
heavily he thought he would die. At the behest of a relative, he stopped drinking on April
16, 2013, and entered a seven-day inpatient detoxification program the next day.
Thereafter, he successfully completed an eight-week intensive outpatient treatment
program. He has been sober since April 16, 2013. Applicant’s use of marijuana was
sporadic, and he used drugs only when he was intoxicated.
As alleged in the SOR, Applicant was arrested at least twice for alcohol-related
offenses. At age 21, in 2005, he was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol.
Three years later, he was charged with being drunk and disorderly after he became
unruly in a bar and was thrown out. (FORM, Item 5) 
The only adverse information Applicant disclosed in his EQIP concerned a 2010
discharge of his debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. During a January 2015 subject
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
interview, and in response to DOD interrogatories, he stated that he omitted his drug
use and his two arrests because he forgot to list them or did not understand the
questions. However, in response to the SOR, he stated that he omitted the information
out of fear of losing the opportunity to work at the defense contractor that sponsored his
request for clearance. (FORM, Items 2 and 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant used illegal drugs with varying frequency from 2007 until 2013. This
information reasonably raises a security concern that is stated at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances,
and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act
of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants ,  narco t ics ,  s t imulants,  and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar
substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)). By contrast, Applicant’s
drug use has not recurred in almost three years and was a by-product of his alcoholism,
which has been addressed through successful inpatient and outpatient treatment. The
following AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (3)
an appropriate period of abstinence.
5
Available information is sufficient to resolve the security concerns under this
guideline in favor of the Applicant.
Personal Conduct
Applicant deliberately withheld information that is relevant and necessary for an
informed assessment of his suitability for access to classified information. The security
concern this raises is expressed at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities).
I have also considered application of the pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions.
Inaccurate statements that result from mistake, misunderstanding, or forgetfulness, as
Applicant claimed in his subject interview and interrogatory responses, are not
disqualifying. The concern at AG ¶ 16(a) is whether the statement was made
intentionally. Applicant admitted in response to the SOR that he deliberately withheld
the information about his drug use and arrests because he was concerned he would not
keep his job. Such conduct contrasts directly with the most basic tenet of the industrial
security program; namely, that the Government must be able to trust that persons in
whom sensitive information is entrusted will protect the national interest, even at the
expense of one’s personal interests. Applicant failed to meet this standard in his initial
opportunity to demonstrate his trustworthiness. None of the AG ¶ 17 mitigating
conditions apply.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and H, I have reviewed the record before me in
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s apparent
success in overcoming his addiction to alcohol reflects positively on him and bodes well
for his future success. Although he is not likely to again use illegal drugs, his willingness
to conceal information to protect his own interests raises serious doubts about his
judgment and reliability. Because the protection of the national interest is the principal
goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
6
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                            
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
