                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)     
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04989
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se            
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence and foreign
preference. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of Case
On December 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which
detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative
determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance. DOD recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended,
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
2
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 23, 2014, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 7, 2015. The case was scheduled for
hearing on June 17, 2015. A hearing was held as scheduled. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2); Applicant relied on two
witnesses (including himself) and seven exhibits. (AEs A-G) The transcript (Tr) was
received June 25, 2015.  
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of facts
contained in seven documents: U.S. Relations with Colombia, Fact Sheet, U.S.
Department of State (November 2013); Foreign Terrorist Organizations, U.S.
Department of State (September 2012); Country Reports: Western Hemisphere
Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism 2013 (April 2014); Travel Warning, Colombia,
U.S. Department of State (November 2014); Latin America; Terrorism Issues,
Congressional Research Service (March 2012); Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 2013, Colombia, U.S. Department of State (undated); Quick Facts,
Colombia, U.S. Department of State (December 2014).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). 
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Colombia and
other security concerns. Administrative notice was extended to the documents
themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did
not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information
contained in the reports addressing Colombia’s current status.
Post Hearing Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend
subparagraph 1.b of the SOR to add that Applicant used his Colombian passport in
March 2013 to travel to Colombia and renewed his Colombian passport in March 2015.
This passport carried an expiration date of March 2025. Applicant did not object to the
amendment, and for good cause shown, Department Counsel’s motion was granted.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with performance evaluations and
certificates of U.S. citizenship for his brother and mother. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. The Government was
granted five days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant submitted
3
performance evaluations for 2013-2015 and U.S. naturalization certificates for his
mother and brother. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs H-J.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly (a) maintains citizenship with both the
United States and Colombia; (b) has a passport issued by Colombia with an anticipated
[past] expiration of February 12, 2015; (c) voted in the Colombia Presidential election in
2010; and (d) traveled to Colombia several times between 2008 and 2013.
Under Guideline B Applicant allegedly (a) has a mother and father who are
citizens of Colombia; (b) has a brother and half-sister who are citizens and residents of
Colombia; and (c) maintains several contacts with friends and relatives whom are still
citizens and resident of Colombia.
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed that Colombia allows for Colombian nationals to have
citizenship with other countries. He claimed he is willing to turn in his passport to the
proper authorities and cease voting in Colombian elections. In his travels to Colombia in
2008 and 2013, he claimed the purpose of his visits was to vacation and visit friends
and family. 
Applicant claimed in his answer that both of his parents are Colombian citizens
who possess U.S. green cards and reside in Applicant’s U.S. community. He claimed
his mother is pursuing U.S. citizenship; while his father is taking English classes to
improve his language skills to meet U.S. citizenship requirements. Applicant also
claimed his brother is a U.S. citizen, who travels to Colombia less frequently, and his
one-half sister is a psychological counselor in Colombia who has no intention of
becoming a U.S. citizen due to career choices. And he claimed no financial ties or
responsibilities to his friends residing in Colombia with whom he has had little interaction
over the years.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old field supervisor of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.  
 
Background
Applicant has never been married and has no children. (GE 1) He has been in a
romantic relationship with a woman for more that ten years and has a child from this
relationship. (Tr. 39-40) He provides financial support for both his girlfriend and his son.
(Tr. 41, 61, 64) He attended college classes between September 2002 and May 2007,
and earned an associate of arts degree in liberal arts in October 2007. (GE 1 and AE G;
4
Tr. 26, 74) He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2009 in communications. (GE 1 and
AE G; Tr. 27)
Applicant immigrated to the United States with his parents and brother on tourist
visas in December 1996. (GEs 1-2 and AE B; Tr. 25-26) He obtained a green card and
has maintained his U.S. residency with his parents since arriving in the United States.
(Tr. 27, 30, and 63)  Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2013 and was
issued a U.S. passport in the same month and year. (GEs 1-2 and AEs D and E; Tr. 27,
47 )  Once he became a U.S. citizen, he dropped his mother’s surname. (GE 2) Since
August 2010, he has worked for a defense contractor where he specializes in the
installation of hardware that drives the software his company provides its customers.
(Tr. 29) 
Before becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant voted in one Colombian election (i.e.,
in 2010), but has not voted in a foreign election since becoming a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 42-
43) By contrast, since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has voted in U.S. state elections. (Tr.
54)
Split preference issues
Between 2008 and March 2015, Applicant traveled to Columbia on a number of
occasions to visit family members. (GEs 1-2)  Altogether, he traveled to Colombia to
visit his family on five occasions before becoming a U.S. citizen: in March 2008, in
December 2008, in December 2009, in December 2012, and in January 2013. (GEs 1-
2; Tr. 43-44, 47) On each trip he used his Colombian passport. His trip to Colombia in
January 2013 was the last trip he made with his parents before he became a U.S.
citizen. (Tr. 47)
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant made one trip to Colombia (in March
2015) to visit his family and friends. (GE 1; Tr. 57-58)  On this trip, he entered Colombia
with his U.S. passport, but used an expired Colombian passport. (Tr. 47) To enter and
exit the country, he was required to pay a fine and exit on his expired Colombian
passport. (Tr. 45-49) While in Colombia, he visited his U.S. grandparents who were in
Colombia at the time, as well as his aunts and uncles on his father’s side. (Tr. 49-50)
Following his return from Colombia the same month, he applied for and received a
renewed Colombian passport with a new expiration date of March 2025. (GE 2)
In June 2015, Applicant surrendered his Colombia passport to his facility security
officer (FSO). In an affidavit executed by his FSO, the FSO confirmed that Applicant
voluntarily surrendered his Colombian passport to him. (AE A) The FSO, in turn,
affirmed he would retain custody of the passport in a secure location and will file an
incident report should Applicant request that the passport be returned to him. (AE A)
The FSO conveyed no indication of whether he would return the passport to Applicant
on request. (AE A)
5
In March 2014, Applicant was interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM). Asked by the agent whether Applicant was willing to renounce his
Colombian citizenship, Applicant indicated he would rather not if he did not have to out
of concern of being denied entry and exit without Colombian citizenship and a
Colombian passport. (GE 2) He confirmed, though, that he would consider renouncing
his Colombian citizenship should it become necessary for a security clearance. To date,
though, Applicant has taken no concrete steps to renounce his Colombian citizenship.
(GE 2) Applicant has no affiliations with any government or military officials in Colombia
and has no property, financial interests, or benefits in Colombia.
Foreign influence issues
Applicant’s parents currently reside in the United States. (GEs 1- 2) They hold
Colombian citizenship and have property in Colombia, which they rent to one of his
father’s aunts. (Tr. 50) Applicant has a brother and half-sister who retain Colombian
citizenship. His brother became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2013 and retained
his Colombian citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. (GE 2) Applicant himself has no
property interests in Colombia. (Tr. 51) And while in Colombia on vacation trips before
becoming a U.S. citizen, he never used his Colombian passport to gain any special
benefits, medical benefits, or travel benefits.(Tr. 51)
Applicant’s brother resides with Applicant and their parents. (Tr. 33) To the best
of Applicant’s knowledge, his brother is still considered a Colombian citizen, which
requires him to use his Colombian passport when traveling to Colombia. He has no
affiliation with any foreign government or military (inclusive of Colombia). (GE 1; Tr. 25)
Applicant’s sister, who was born in the United States, also resides with their parents.(AE
I; Tr. 32)
Applicant’s father is employed in the United States as a  cafeteria cook. (Tr. 32)
He has siblings in Colombia who are both citizens and residents of Colombia. (GEs 1-2)
To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, none of his family members who reside in
Colombia have ever encountered members of a terrorist organization. Applicant’s
mother is a listed resident alien and is employed as a housekeeper and child care
provider. (GE 2; 34) His mother is currently pursuing educational courses required for
obtaining naturalized U.S. citizenship. (GE 2)
Besides his siblings (brother and sister) who reside in the United States,
Applicant has a half-sister who is a citizen and resident of Colombia. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 34-
35) She is a practicing psychologist with a Colombian company in Colombia and has
expressed no intention of leaving Colombia. Applicant has little contact with his half-
sister (every four years by telephone) and less frequent personal contacts when he
visits Colombia. (GE 2; Tr. 34-35, 52, 49-50, and 75) Applicant credits his father with
maintaining telephonic monthly contact with his half-sister. (Tr. 75)
In addition to his immediate family members, Applicant has aunts, uncles, and
cousins who are citizens and residents of Colombia. (GEs 1-2; Tr.  ) Applicant maintains
6
yearly contact with these family members. (GE 2) While his father talks to these
Colombian family members on a weekly basis. (Tr. 57-58) 
Colombian background information 
Colombia is a constitutional multiparty democracy with a population of over 44
million. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 3 and U.S. Relations with Colombia, Fact
Sheet, supra, at 17ujn ) It is the second most populous country in South America. Any
person from Colombia is considered a Colombian citizen. (Id.) Any person born in
Colombia may be considered a Colombian citizen, even if never documented as such.
Dual citizens of Colombia are required to use their Colombian passports for entry and
exit regardless of whether the citizen holds dual citizenship. See Administrative Notice,
supra)  Any person born in Colombia may be considered a Colombian citizen, even if
never documented as such. Moreover dual U.S.-Colombian citizens are required to
present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. (Quick Facts, Colombia,
supra, at 2-3.)
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to Colombia.
Violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural areas and cities. The
potential for violence by terrorists and other criminal elements exists in all parts of the
country. (Administrative Notice, supra, at 3) In a November 14, 2014 travel warning, the
Secretary of State designated three Colombian groups-the Revolutionary Armed forces
of Colombia (the FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), and the United Self-
Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC)-as Foreign Terrorist Organizations. See id. and U.S.
Relations with Colombia, Fact Sheet, at 1. 
Continuing talks between Colombian government officials and FARC
representatives notwithstanding, FARC committed the majority of terrorist attacks in the
Western Hemisphere in 2013. See Travel Warning, Colombia, supra, at 1. While there
have been no reports of U.S. citizens being targeted specifically for their nationality, the
FARC and ELN terrorist groups continue to condemn any U.S. influence in Colombia.
(Id.)
Terrorists and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and hold persons of
all nationalities and occupations for ransom. No one is immune from kidnaping on the
basis of occupation, nationality, or other factors. See Travel Warning, Colombia, supra,
at 1. 
In July 2008, a Colombian military operation rescued 15 hostages, including three
U.S. defense contractors held by the FARC since February 2003. See Administrative
Notice, supra, at 1 and Latin America; Terrorism Issues, supra, at 2. The FARC is
estimated to have a strength of around 8,000, and the group continues to engage in
terrorist attacks, extortion, and kidnaping. (Id.)
Although the Colombian government has continued to make positive efforts to
confront and address human rights abuses, serious problems still remain. Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2013, Colombia, supra, at 1. Unlawful and
7
extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, insubordinate military collaboration with new
illegal armed groups, overcrowded and insecure prisons, violence against women,
trafficking in persons, and other serious human rights abuses were reported during 2013,
the most recent year in which such information is presently available from the U.S. State
Department. (Id.)
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by his project managers. One project manager who
has worked with Applicant for close to five years and interacts with him daily considers
Applicant to be very dependable and trustworthy. (Tr. 79-82) He credited Applicant with
outstanding character and being a very good father. (Tr. 81-82) Applicant’s senior project
manager characterized Applicant as praiseworthy and confirmed his promotion of
Applicant from a systems specialist to a site supervisor. (Tr. 86, 88)  
Applicant presented excellent performance evaluations in all areas of evaluation
for the rating years of 2012-2013 and 2014-2015. (AE J) He received high marks for
communication, initiative, dependability, job knowledge, productivity, teamwork, quality,
judgment, problems solving, planning, meeting management, project management,
leadership, hiring and coaching, people management, and overall performance. (AE J)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in reaching at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial,
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk.  
8
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
 Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate preference  for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  See
AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  See AG ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
9
security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant is a well regarded field supervisor of a defense contractor who
immigrated to the United States in 1996 from Colombia with his parents and brother  and
acquired U.S. citizenship in April 2013. When he became a U.S. citizen he acquired a
U.S. passport. However, he retained his Colombian citizenship and passport and later
attempted to use this passport (although expired at the time) to travel to Colombia in
March 2015 before surrendering it to his FSO in June 2015. 
Applicant has since expressed some qualified intent to consider renouncing his
Colombian citizenship should it become necessary for his being granted a security
clearance, but has never expressed an intention in unequivocal terms. Applicant
maintains occasional contact with his half-sister (every four years) who resides in
Colombia, as well as with some of his other family members residing in Colombia. He
has no property, investment, or benefits in Columbia and is a loyal U.S. citizen dedicated
to the values and mores of the United States.
Security concerns related to foreign preference are based on Applicant’s dual
citizenship status with Colombia, attempted use of a Colombian passport after becoming
a naturalized U.S. citizen, and continued possession of his Colombian passport after
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. Foreign influence concerns relative to Applicant’s
having a half-sister and other relatives who are citizens and residents of Colombia are
raised as well.
Foreign Preference 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations of acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country (Colombia in this case) over the interests of the United States. By electing to
retain his dual Colombian citizenship before the issuance of the SOR, and failing to take
more concerted actions to surrender his Colombian passport after becoming a
10
naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2013 with a U.S. passport for personal and business
travel, he satisfied some indicia of a split preference for Colombia and the United States
Until his OPM interview in March 2014, Applicant had consistently elected to
retain his Colombian citizenship and Colombian passport. In his OPM interview, he
expressed some qualified willingness to renounce his Colombian citizenship, but only if it
would facilitate his obtaining a security clearance. Although his willingness to consider
renouncing his Colombian citizenship is a qualified one, it does show some flexibility in
his weighing his personal needs with U.S. security interests.
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can be
trusted in the future to honor his or her fiduciary responsibilities to the Government.
Applicant has worked in the United States for several years since becoming a U.S.
citizen and should be cognizant of the potential risks of working for a U.S. defense
contractor while contemporaneously holding dual citizenship and an expired foreign
passport. His choices are understandable, considering his circumstances and presented
travel difficulties to Colombia to visit his half-sister, extended family members, and
friends without Colombian citizenship and a Colombian passport. But Applicant’s choices
also indicate reluctance to part with his Colombian citizenship and passport and reflect
some split preference for the United States and Colombia.   
Because Applicant elected to retain his Colombian passport initially after
becoming  a U.S. citizen while he held dual U.S. citizenship and a U.S. passport, the
Government may apply certain provisions of disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶
9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.”  This DC includes but
is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such           
         benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another     
          country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
11
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to the established facts and circumstances
herein. By retaining his Colombian passport, Applicant was able to achieve potential
travel privileges and conveniences not available to other U.S. citizens. 
Since the issuance of the SOR, Applicant has expressed a qualified intention to
renounce his Colombian citizenship and surrendered his Colombian passport to his FSO.
These actions reflect positively on Applicant’s efforts to demonstrate his loyalty and
exclusive commitment to the values and responsibilities of U.S. citizenship.
Because Applicant’s dual citizenship status is based on his parents’ citizenship
and birth in Colombia, he may claim the benefits of MC ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is
based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Since he has
surrendered his Colombian passport, he may also claim the mitigation benefits of MC ¶
11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority,
or otherwise invalidated.” None of the other mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s
situation. 
Whole-person precepts are certainly helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s foreign preference concerns herein. The positive trust impressions he has
forged with his project managers and colleagues who have worked with him in recent
years, add support to his claims of trust and loyalty to U.S. core values and his
demonstrated loyalty and preference for the United States.
Overall, Applicant is able to persuade that his current preference is solely with the
United States. Because he benefitted from no Colombian privileges after becoming a
U.S. citizen, he manifested little preference for Colombia under the criteria established
by the Appeal Board. Applicant absolves himself of foreign preference concerns
associated with the presented issue of whether he retains a preference or split
preference for his birth country (Colombia), over his adopted country (the United States).
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to allegations 1.a through 1.d of the
SOR, covered by Guideline C.
Foreign Influence 
Applicant and his family have solid family roots in Colombia.  Determined to make
a new life for themselves and their family, Applicant’s parents, accompanied by Applicant
and his brother, immigrated to the United States in 1996.  Once settled in the United
States, Applicant took advantage of higher education opportunities and earned his high
school diploma before advancing to the college level and earning n associate’s and
bachelor’s degrees in his chosen fields. He has used his education to good purpose with
his current employer and shows good promise for advancement. While initially
committed to retaining his Colombian citizenship and Colombian passport, he has since
considered renouncing his Colombian citizenship and surrendered his Colombian
passport.
12
While his sister-in-law and extended family members remain citizens and
residents of Colombia, Applicant has had only occasional contact with them. None of
Applicant’s family members in Colombia has any affiliations or connections with the
Colombian government or military. Applicant’s mother is a permanent green card
resident of the United States with no manifest intention to return to Colombia. 
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s family
members in Colombia could be subjected to pressures or compromise to enlist their help
in eliciting classified information from Applicant. Because Applicant no longer has a
Colombian passport, he can no longer freely travel to Colombia. And he possesses no
special skills and experience that could conceivably place himself and his Colombian
family members in harm’s way. 
Before surrendering his Colombian passport, both Applicant and his family
members residing in Colombia might be subject to undue foreign influence and pressure
by Colombian authorities to access sensitive proprietary information in Applicant’s
possession or control. As such, he presented a potentially heightened security risk
covered by disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. 
While stress points do exist between Colombia and the United States over active
terrorist organizations that operate in Colombia that create geopolitical risks for Colombia
and the United States in reaching the full potential of their strategic relationship in
fighting terrorism and trafficking, Colombia continues to be an ally of the United States in
the war on terrorism. True, Colombia’s human rights record remains uneven and in some
cases poor by Western standards. But everything considered, the risks of any pressure,
coercion, or foreign influence on any of Applicant’s distant family members and residing
in Colombia promise to be minimal and manageable.
Because of the occasional contacts Applicant and his father maintain with
Applicant’s half-sister and extended family members, consideration of DC ¶ 7(b),
“connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information,”  has some application to Applicant’s situation.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. Guidelines are available for referencing when making risk
assessments about a country’s status. Country-related materials and information about
Colombia were supplied by the Government.
13
Based on Applicant’s case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.
[United States],” is  fully available to Applicant under the facts of this case. With
Applicant’s expressing some interest in renouncing his Colombian citizenship and having
surrendered his Colombian passport to his FSO, Applicant’s family members pose little
cognizable risk that could subject him to potential pressures, coercion, and influence
from Colombian government and military officials. 
MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United
States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest,” is fully applicable. Applicant’s family ties to Colombia are significantly
weakened now that his brother holds U.S. citizenship and a U.S. passport. Not to
minimize Applicant’s ties with his half-sister and other family members in Colombia,
Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflicts of interest in favor of the
U.S. interest. 
 MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” also applies to Applicant’s situation. MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature
of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure
the individual,” has some application. Applicant has no property, financial interests, or
benefits in Colombia that could expose him to potential conflicts.
Unavailable to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with
existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.” Applicant has had no
contracts or business interests in Colombia to report to his FSO or cognizant U.S.
officials. 
All told, Applicant’s family links and contacts in Colombia are modest and pose
little heightened risks of pressure, coercion, and  influence that could be brought to bear
on Applicant and his family members residing in Colombia. Remaining risks are clearly
manageable ones.
Whole-person assessment is available to minimize Applicant’s exposure to any
potential conflicts of interests with Colombian government officials. His supervisors who
have worked with him find him to be highly responsible and productive and a promising
site supervisor with excellent character. Overall, any potential security concerns
attributable to Applicant's having family members residing in Colombia are sufficiently
mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand any
14
Colombian risks of undue influence. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.d For Applicant
GUIDELINE C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a-2.c: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
15
