 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04120 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 4, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 7, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 26, 2015. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On September 8, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 4, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
was provided to the Applicant on September 16, 2015. He was given the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on September 23, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed 
that would have expired on October 23, 2015.  
 
I received the case assignment on November 9, 2015. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in Paragraph 1. (Items1, 2)  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He is married and does not have any children. He is 
divorced from his first wife. Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since 1981. 
He has a high school diploma. He also has had a security clearance since 1982. (Items 
1, 2) 
 
 Applicant admitted to the theft allegations in the SOR. They state that he stole 
merchandise from a store in his town on two occasions. He did so because in 2012 he 
had trouble with a credit card at this retail chain store. He committed this first offense 
because he was angry with the store so he took the merchandise without paying for it. 
He committed the second offense in March 2013 in the same store for the same reason. 
The items taken were valued at $65 and $60. (Items 1-4) 
 
 Applicant returned to the store in 2013 and confessed to the store management 
that he stole several items from the store. He admitted these offenses voluntarily. He 
did so because he found out the problem was with the credit card company, not the 
store. The store prosecuted him for theft. On April 29, 2013, he pled guilty to both 
offenses and sentenced to serve 18 months of probation, 50 hours of community 
service for both offenses, pay a $300 fine for each offense, and court costs. Under that 
state’s laws, these theft offenses are misdemeanors. (Items 1-4) 
 
 Applicant submitted with his Answer two statements from the County Supervision 
Officer that Applicant completed the probation for both crimes from April 29, 2013, to 
October 24, 2014. Applicant also paid his fines and completed his community service. 
He also paid his court fees. (Items 1-4) 
 
     Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and   
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions possibly apply: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
 Applicant was convicted in 2013 of two incidents of retail theft. He committed the 
offenses at the same store about one year apart. Both offenses were misdemeanors.  
He admitted both offenses voluntarily. Both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
condition might apply: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant confessed his crimes two years ago. He did so voluntarily and, without 
his cooperation, the merchant would not have known that there was a theft. Applicant 
completed his probation, paid his fines, and all his court fees.  
 
 Applicant has evidence of his successful rehabilitation. There has not been a 
recurrence of these offenses. He has worked for the same company since 1981.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
voluntarily stole the merchandise from a local store, once in 2012 and the second time 
in 2013. It was really the credit card company that caused the problem when he tried to 
use the card at that store in 2012. When Applicant discovered this fact, his conscience 
obviously bothered him because it was not the store’s fault, so he confessed his crime.  
 
However, there is nothing in the file to explain why he could have not paid with 
cash or used a different credit card. Applicant reacted in the wrong way to his problems 
with the store. There is no likelihood this offense will be repeated and no potential for 
pressure or coercion because the situation is a matter of public record.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
