 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04414 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 9, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
21, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 17, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted an e-mail and documents that were marked AE E 
through I and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 28, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor company at the same location since 2011. He 
served in the U.S. military from 1983 until he retired in 2003. He seeks to retain his 
security clearance, which he has held since his time in the military. He is a high school 
graduate. He has been separated from his spouse since about 2006. He has four adult 
children.1 
 
 Applicant had financial difficulties after he retired from the military and was 
unemployed for a period. His 2006 separation also adversely affected his finances.2 
 
 The SOR alleges two state tax liens totaling $3,340; a $4,210 judgment for an 
unpaid car loan; a $15,535 unpaid car loan; a $168 medical debt; and four 
miscellaneous debts totaling $4,288. Applicant admitted owing some of the debts, and 
he denied owing the remaining debts. 
 
 Applicant denied owing taxes to the two states that filed liens against him. For a 
period, he lived in State A and worked in State B. A tax lien of $632 was filed against 
him in State B in November 2008. He disputed the lien, and it was deleted from his 
Equifax credit report. A $2,708 tax lien was filed against him in State A in March 2012. 
The lien was released in May 2014.3 
 
 Applicant had a car that was repossessed and a car that was wrecked and 
“totaled.” SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $15,535 charged-off debt for a car loan. Applicant stated 
this was the loan for the car that was repossessed in about 2007. He denied owing the 
amount alleged in the SOR. The credit reports in evidence list this debt as charged off, 
but none of them list a balance on the loan. The $15,535 amount in the SOR was 
included in one credit report as the high credit on the loan. Applicant has never been 
contacted after the car was repossessed about any deficiency owed on the loan.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges the $4,210 judgment for an unpaid car loan. Applicant stated 
that his car was wrecked, and the insurance company paid the creditor holding the car 
loan, but not the full amount of the loan. The judgment was awarded in August 2007. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 42; GE 1, 5. 
 
2 Tr. at 29; GE 1, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 13-17, 26, 38-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE A, D. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-30, 35-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE D. 
 
 
3 
 
The judgment does not appear on the four newest credit reports in evidence, likely 
because it is past the seven-year period for reporting derogatory matter.5  
 
 Applicant accepted an offer from the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.b to settle a 
$4,874 debt (alleged in the SOR and listed in the credit reports as a $2,084 debt) for 
$2,600, payable within 30 days of the offer letter dated October 27, 2015. Applicant 
established that he paid $2,000 to the creditor by November 13, 2015.6 
 
 Applicant paid the $168 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i on September 22, 
2015. He settled the $514 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g with a $411 payment on November 
13, 2015. He paid $335 on November 5, 2015, to the collection company that is 
handling the $502 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. It is unclear whether this is a settlement 
payment or a partial payment.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $1,188 debt to a collection company on behalf of a bank.  
The debt is reported by all three credit reporting agencies on the March 2014 combined 
credit report. The activity date on the account is May 2012. When he was interviewed 
for his background investigation in March 2014, Applicant stated that he never belonged 
to the bank, and did not have a credit card issued by the bank. He provided similar 
testimony at the hearing. In his response to the SOR, he admitted owing the debt, but 
denied owing the amount alleged in the SOR, noting that he had a $300 limit on the 
account. It appears that he may have confused this debt with another account, as the 
credit reports show another account with a $300 limit. I accept his testimony as a denial 
of the allegation that he owes this debt. The debt does not appear on the January 2015 
and August 2015 Equifax credit reports or the September 2015 TransUnion credit 
report.8 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling when he was in the military. He testified 
that his finances are in good shape and he is willing and able to pay his debts. He 
stated that he has attempted to contact several creditors that have not returned his 
calls.9 I found Applicant to be somewhat unsophisticated in financial matters, but I also 
found him to be candid and sincere about his desire to correct his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 17-19, 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE D. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE D, F. 
 
7 Tr. at 19-26, 31-35, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE D, G-I. 
 
8 Tr. at 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE D. 
 
9 Tr. at 40-44; AE E. 
 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant paid, settled, had payment plans for, successfully disputed, or 
otherwise resolved almost all of the debts alleged in the SOR. He stated that he 
attempted to contact several creditors, but they have not returned his calls. His actions 
came later than they should have, but I am convinced he has learned from the 
experience and that he will continue his efforts to resolve any remaining financial 
problems. Financial concerns are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 20 years 
of honorable service in the U.S. military. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
