 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04444 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP and the 
ensuing background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 10, 2015, under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On April 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 29, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 6. On October 12, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. On December 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a Response to the 
FORM that has been marked as Item 7. Department Counsel had no objection to 
Applicant’s submission. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 15 delinquent debts totaling $45,480 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.o). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the two largest debts – a 
charged-off mortgage loan for $42,510 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a charged-off credit card 
account for $1,592 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The two denied debts account for 96% of the alleged 
indebtedness. He admitted the remaining SOR debts. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. Credit reports in the FORM contain substantial evidence of the 
denied debts.1 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old business manager who has been working for a 
defense contractor since January 1984. He graduated from high school in 1979 and 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1983 and a master’s degree in 1987. He has not served 
in the military. He has been married for the past 23 years. His e-QIP listed four children, 
ages 17, 19, 21, and 23, and three stepchildren, ages 26, 27, and 35. He was granted a 
security clearance in 2003.2 
 
 In an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in May 2013, Applicant 
attributed his delinquent debts to medical expenses incurred by him and his son and to 
his wife’s irresponsible spending habits. During the interview, Applicant indicated that he 
was unaware of most of the medical bills reflected on his credit report.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – charged-off account for $42,510. This was a second mortgage on 
Applicant’s former residence. In his Answer to the SOR, he indicated this mortgage loan 
was canceled as a result of a legal action that alleged the lender used unfair lending 
practices for securing nonprime, high-interest-rate loans for debt consolidation. His 
Answer contained no documentation confirming his claim. In his Response to the 
FORM, he provided an IRS Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) and two Settlement 
Statement (HUD-1) forms. These documents established that the second mortgage was 
cancelled in February 2013. The home was sold in June 2015 when Applicant moved to 
another city for a new job assignment. The HUD-1 form for the sale of his former 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3, 5, and 6. 
 
2 Items 1 and 2. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he has raised eight children, but 
his e-QIP only lists four children and three stepchildren. In his e-QIP, he indicated that he had no former 
spouses, but he disclosed that he had a former spouse in his OPM interview.  
 
3 Item 4.  
 
 
3 
 
 
residence reflected that the sales price was $340,000. The lender of the first mortgage 
(who was also the lender of the canceled secondary mortgage) received $178,136 for 
the payoff of the first mortgage, and no money went toward the payment of a second 
mortgage during that transaction. Applicant received $129,434 in that sale. In July 2015, 
he purchased a home in another city for $270,000. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a has been 
resolved.4   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – charged-off account for $1,592. This was a credit card account that 
had a date of last activity of January 2013. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated 
that he was diagnosed with cancer and lost track of this debt. He also indicated the debt 
was paid as of July 2014. In his Response to the FORM, he presented a document from 
a law firm confirming the payment of this debt.5   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.j, and 1.k – medical debts past due for $222, $97, $67, 
$45, and $32. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his son was diagnosed 
with a spinal condition that required surgery and his daughter was diagnosed with 
Lupus. His medical insurance only paid a portion of the bills. He stated that he was 
unaware his medical insurance did not pay the full bills, but also indicated that he was 
remiss in not paying closer attention to the charges and was surprised and 
embarrassed these debts have negatively impacted his credit report. In his Response to 
the FORM, he provided documentation establishing the above medical debts have been 
paid.6   
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o – medical debts past due for $143, 
$64, $62, $60, $374, $92, $60, and $60. These eight medical debts total $915. In his 
Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that he did not have specific information 
about these accounts and was attempting to identify the creditors. He stated that, once 
the creditors were identified, he would pay the balance owed.7 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR and Response to the FORM, Applicant highlighted 
recent events that have improved his financial situation. First, he noted that only one of 
his children still resides in his home and that child has no medical problems. Second, he 
received a promotion, which was the reason for his move to another city. Third, he 
indicated that his current mortgage payments, utility bills, and property taxes were lower 
than those at his previous residence. Fourth, he paid off his car loan. Finally, he 
mentioned he regularly maintained a zero balance on all of his credit cards.8  
                                                          
4 Items 1 and 7.    
 
5 Items 1 and 7.    
 
6 Items 1 and 7.   
 
7 Items 1 and 7.    
 
8 Items 1 and 7.    
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. He did not 
provide a monthly budget. The amount of his discretionary income each month is 
unknown.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been diagnosed with cancer. His son had a spinal condition that 
required surgery and his daughter was diagnosed with Lupus. These medical problems 
were conditions beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. However, 
he also attributed his financial problems to his wife’s irresponsible spending and his 
failure to track properly his medical bills. Based on these circumstances, he receives 
only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant resolved the two largest debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) that account for 
96% of the alleged indebtedness. He has also paid five medical debts. He is in the 
process of tracking down the creditors of the eight remaining medical debts totaling 
$915. He provided sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control and are being resolved. His delinquent debts do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) partially apply. 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.9 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
                                                          
9 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
evidence, outweighs the security concerns at issue. Applicant met his burden of 
persuasion. His financial problems leave me with no questions or doubts as to his 
current eligibility to access classified information.  
Formal Findings 
 
As required under the Directive, the formal findings are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
