                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-04386
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his use of illegal drugs. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 16, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 8, 2015, and did not respond to the
FORM.  The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. 
Procedural Issues
Department Counsel requested administrative notice be taken of facts covering
U.S. policy concerns regarding marijuana. Department Counsel attached the following
U.S. publications: Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use, Memorandum
from the Director of National Intelligence (October 2014); Guidance Regarding
Marijuana Enforcement, U.S. Department of Justice (August 29. 2013).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are
well known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). 
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-named memoranda addressing the prohibited use of marijuana under federal
law. Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with
the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant from
challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the memoranda
covering marijuana use.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly used marijuana with varying frequency
between January 2007 and June 2013; (b) purchased marijuana with varying frequency
between June 2010 and June 2013; (c) cultivated, sold, and distributed marijuana with
varying frequency between 2011 and May 2013; (d) used codeine without prescription
between 2011 and May 2013; (e) used Adderol without prescription between January
2010 and June 2013; (f) used LSD with varying frequency between January 2010 and
June 2011; (g) used Ecstasy one time in June 2013; (h) used psilocybin mushrooms
with varying frequency between January 2010 and June 2011; and (i) used Ketamine
one time in June 2010. Allegations made under Guideline H are incorporated under
Guideline J.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR with
explanations. He claimed he admitted the allegations in an effort to demonstrate
complete honesty with the hope of establishing trustworthiness. He claimed that his
admissions guarantee that the discretions of his past cannot be held against him in the
future. He claimed, too, that his use of these substances covered in the SOR occurred
in safe settings and were never associated with other criminal activities or personal
addiction. And he claimed he was immature and did not think of the consequences later
in life.
3
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 26-year-old composite fabricator for a defense contractor who
seeks a security security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. (Item 4) He attended college
classes between August 2008 and March 2010, but claims no degree or diploma. (Item
4) Between September 2011 and September 2012. He attended a trade school and
earned a certification. (Item 4)  He claimed no military service. (Item 4) Applicant has
worked for his current employer since September 2013. Previously, he was employed
as an intern for a non-profit organization (between September 2012 and September
2013). (Item 4)
Drug use history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in high school and used the drug with
varying frequency between January 2007 and June 2013. (Item 1) He satisfied his
marijuana needs with purchases. From time to time, he helped a friend in cultivating
marijuana between June 2010 and June 2013. (Items 1 and 5) He credited marijuana
with providing a calming effect on him. 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency between January 2007 and
June 2013 with friends at homes and parties. (Item 5) He used it for relaxation, relief of
back pain, and for sleep aid. (Item 5) He estimates using the substance every other day
on average before tapering off in 2012 and 2013. He attributed his use of illegal drugs
to minor needs, his interest in exploration, and immaturity. (Item 1) He claimed he could
return to regular use of the substance were it to be legalized, or if he did not need a
security clearance. 
Between June 2010 and June 2013, Applicant experimented with other drugs of
choice. He admitted to using non-prescribed codeine between 2011 and May 2013 and
non-prescribed Adderol between January and June 2013. He admitted, too, in his
Answer and summary of interview with an agent of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) to using LSD with varying frequency between January 2010 and
June 2011; Ecstasy once in June 2013; psilocybin mushrooms with varying frequency
between January 2010 and June 2011; and Ketamine once in June 2010. (Items 2 and
5)
Applicant was also involved in the production and sale of THC products. He
supported the care givers in his home state in their efforts to develop an extraction of
medical marijuana for soaps and balms. He purchased marijuana from his care givers
from time for himself and close friends. (Item 5) Infrequently, he sold small amounts (no
more than a pound in the aggregate) of marijuana to a small group. (Item 1, at 44 and
Item 5) He sold it in 2010 for a short while to help pay a few bills. He provided his
4
support of the medical marijuana industry, characterizing it as a “valuable endeavor.”
(Item 1, at 45) Since 2013, he has neither used, purchased, nor marketed marijuana
products out of concern for keeping his security clearance.
Applicant no longer associates with anyone who uses illegal drugs. (Item 5, at 2-
3) His family and friends are aware of his past use and involvement in illegal drugs.
(Item 5, at 3) He has never associated with other criminal activities or personal
addiction. (Item 2) 
Federal laws covering the enforcement of marijuana use
In a memorandum of October 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI)
issued guidance, making it clear that no state can authorize violations of federal law.
See Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use, supra. Under federal law,
marijuana is identified as a Schedule 1 controlled drug. Noted, too, in the DNI’s
memorandum, Executive Order 12564 mandates a drug-free workplace and drug-free
federal workforce. (Id.)
Guidance to federal prosecutors regarding marijuana enforcement in the states
was issued in August 2013 by the Deputy Attorney General (DAG) and reaffirmed the
Justice Department’s enforcement priorities in addressing state laws that legalize
marijuana for cultivation and distribution for medicinal use. See Guidance Regarding
Marijuana Enforcement, supra, at 3. Under current Justice Department (DOJ) guidance,
prosecutors are counseled to review marijuana cases on a case-by-case basis and
weigh all available information and evidence, including, but not limited to, whether the
marijuana operation is demonstrably in compliance with a strong and effective state
regulatory system. (Id.) 
Most importantly, neither the DOJ guidance nor any state or local law provides a
legal defense to a violation of federal law, including any civil or criminal violation of the
Controlled Substance Act (CSA). The guidance stresses that even in jurisdictions with
strong and effective regulatory systems, evidence that particular conduct threatens
federal priorities will subject that person or entity to federal enforcement action.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” The AGs must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
5
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
6
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised about Applicant’s multiple use of illegal drugs and
non-prescribed drugs, cultivation, sales, and purchases of illegal drugs over a
considerable period time spanning 2007 through June 2013. His admissions to using
marijuana and other illegal or non-prescribed drugs with varying frequency create
security concerns over risks of recurrence, as well as judgment issues. On the
strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for
drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Judgment concerns exist over Applicant’s active drug involvement over a
number of years. While his marijuana activities (use, purchases, cultivation, and
distribution) may have complied with his state’s law authorizing medicinal-based
marijuana use and other marijuana-related actions, they reflect violations of both
federal law and DOD’s mandated drug-free workplace and drug-free federal workforce
policies in place for both DOD employees and DOD contractors. See Adherence to
Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use, supra, and Guidance Regarding Marijuana
Enforcement, supra. 
When the CSA has been challenged on federalism grounds, the courts have
consistently extended federal preemption authority over competing state laws that
legalize marijuana use. In Oakland Cannabis Buyers, 532 U.S. 483 (2001), the
7
Supreme Court did not attempt to invalidate the enabling legislation adopted by the
particular state in issue. This legislation was designed to implement the key enabling
provisions of the state’s Proposition 215, under ¶¶ 11362.5 et seq.  Proposition 215
(known as the Compassionate Use Act) was passed by this state’s voters in 1996 to
validate the right of residents of the state to possess and use marijuana for medical
purposes, when they have a recommendation from a licensed physician.  Proposition
215 gives the patient’s primary care giver the right to cultivate and possess marijuana
for the patient.  But the Oakland Cannabis Buyers Court did affirm continued federal
jurisdiction over drug violators covered by the law without regard to the state’s
marijuana exception. 
More recently, the Supreme Court seized  the opportunity to refine and clarify
the reach of its holding in Oakland Cannabis Buyers, supra.  In Raich v. Gonzales,
545 U.S. 1, 8-14 (2005), the Court addressed the claims of two state residents who
suffered from a variety of serious medical conditions and has sought to avail
themselves of medical marijuana pursuant to the terms of the state’s Compassionate
Use Act. Notwithstanding that county investigating officials had found that one
respondent’s medical use of marijuana was entirely lawful, federal agents seized and
destroyed all six of her cannabis plants. 
In Raich v. Gonzales, supra, the Supreme Court held that the regulation of
marijuana under the CSA was fully within Congress’ commerce power (U.S. Const.,
art. I, ¶ 8), because marijuana production intended for home production could have a
substantial effect on supply and demand in the national market. The Raich Court
reasoned that federal failure to regulate the intrastate manufacturing and possession
of marijuana would leave a considerable gap in the CSA.  In turn, the Court vacated
the Ninth Circuit’ s judgment. 
So, even if Applicant complied with his state’s permit to use, cultivate, and
distribute marijuana for medicinal purposes, his state-approved medicinal permit
would not foreclose the Federal Government from prosecuting illegal possession
charges under the CSA.  
  Where (as here) there is additional probative adverse information covered by
Guideline J that is not covered by Guideline H, and vice versa, and which reflects a
recurring pattern of federally-based criminal activity, questionable judgment, or
irresponsible behavior, independent grounds do exist for considering questionable
judgment and trustworthiness allegations under Guideline J as well as Guideline H.
Authority for considering overlapping conduct under both guidelines is contained in
the guidance provided in Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(d) of the Directive.   
Under Guideline J, criminal conduct (both charged and alleged) are covered by
D.C. ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and D.C. ¶ 31(c),
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” Both disqualifying conditions
apply to Applicant.
8
Applicant has made some noticeable gains in his efforts to mitigate his past
involvement with illegal substances (mostly marijuana-related). Several of the listed
illegal and non-prescribed drugs used were infrequent and have not been used since
2013 (codeine, Adderol, and Ecstasy) Three of the drugs he used (i.e., LSD,
psilocybin mushrooms, and Ketamine), he quit using in 2011 and 2010, respectively.
His cessation of marijuana involvement was more recent, though, and still leaves
questions about his exposure to risks of returning to marijuana use.
With almost two years of claimed abstinence from illegal drug use and non-
prescribed drugs and disassociation from friends he assisted in cultivating and
distributing marijuana products, Applicant merits some consideration of two of the
mitigating conditions of Guideline H: MC ¶ 26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using
associates and contacts,” and MC ¶ 26(b)(2), “changing or avoiding the environment
where drugs were used.” Both of these mitigating conditions have very limited
application without more input from Applicant on his progress. And without more
information from Applicant about his current abstinence efforts, none of the mitigating
conditions covered by Guideline J are available to him.
In fairness to Applicant, he has exhibited open candor about his past drug use
and involvement with marijuana cultivation and distribution and his associations with
persons who have used, cultivated, and distributed marijuana. His commitments to
breaking all ties and connections with friends and associates who use or are in any
way involved with marijuana use and production are encouraging.
Still, Applicant has provided little evidence of his progress in breaking with his
past friends and contacts and claims a relatively short period of abstinence in his
answer and summary of interview with an agent of the OPM. Having a state-approved
medicinal exception would not absolve him from potential exposure to federal
enforcement actions. So, while Applicant’s assurances that he has no intention of
ever resuming his involvement with  marijuana, or any illegal substance, in the future,
are entitled to some weight, they cannot be totally separated from the recurrence risks
that face Applicant in the foreseeable future. Furthermore, medicinal use of marijuana
that might be legal under the laws of Applicant’s state is not immune to federal
prosecution for violation of the CSA under the federal government’s concurrent
jurisdiction over manufacturing, distributing, and possessing illegal drugs. 
 Because of the recency of Applicant’s discontinued involvement with
marijuana (less than two years), and the other illegal drugs and non-prescribed drugs
he tried, and the uncertainty about his breaks from the past friend he assisted in
cultivating and distributing marijuana, it is still too soon to conclude that Applicant’s
illegal drug involvement and use of non-prescribed drugs and judgment lapses
associated therewith are fully mitigated. More time is necessary before safe predictive
judgments can be made that Applicant will not resume his involvement with marijuana
and other illegal and non-prescribed drugs.    
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established some
understanding of DOD policy constraints on the use of illegal and un-prescribed
substances. Because motivation is never easy to objectively establish, the placement
9
of reasonable time lines on clearance applicants to test and absolve them of
recurrence risks makes safe and practical sense when balancing the interests of
protecting national security with the interests of those who seek access to the nation’s
secrets.  
Considering the record on a whole, at this time there is too little documented
evidence of Applicant’s mitigation efforts to avert foreseeable risks of recurrent
involvement with illegal and non-prescribed drugs. While he is to be commended on
his decision to discontinue illegal drug usage and activities related to marijuana
cultivation and distribution, it is still too early to make safe predictions about his ability
to sustain his abstinence, Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances
surrounding Applicant’s drug use and judgment lapses, Applicant fails to mitigate
security concerns related to his drug use and criminal conduct issues. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guidelines H and J.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):          AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.i: Against Applicant
GUIDELINE J  (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):           AGAINST APPLICANT    
Subpara. 2.a: Against  Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
