1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05486 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mani B. Fierro, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 16, 2010, 
seeking to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. On May 28, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 10, 
2015, and the case was assigned to me on September 17, 2015. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 30, 2015, 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing for October 20, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record 
open until November 6, 2015, to enable him to submit additional evidence, but he did 
not submit any additional items. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 
2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he owed the debts alleged in 
the SOR, but he contended that two of the three debts alleged were incurred when he 
was the victim of fraud. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a cyber 
security officer. He has worked for his current employer since November 2008. He has 
worked for federal contractors since April 2000. He served on active duty in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from July 1970 to May 1972. He received a security clearance from 
another government agency in October 2005. 
 
 Although Applicant has been employed almost continuously since April 2000, he 
has experienced frequent job changes, sometimes under unfavorable conditions. 
According to the employment information disclosed in his SCA, he left a job as an 
administrator for a federal contractor in October 2001 after he called in sick, his 
supervisor told him he should quit, and he took another job with another federal 
contractor on the same day. He left a job in November 2003 because his supervisor told 
him he “wasn’t a fit” in the company and was no longer needed. He left a job in 
December 2005 because of the heavy workload. He left a job in July 2006 because he 
did not like the work or the working conditions. He left a job in January 2007 because he 
could not afford to pay for gas or parking. He left an overseas job in January 2010 
because of his wife’s illness and his inability to get along with his program manager. 
(GX 1 at 20-41.) 
 
 Applicant married in April 1984. He has no children from his marriage, but he has 
an adult stepson and stepdaughter. He has taken college courses and attended 
numerous technical and vocational schools, but he does not have a college degree. 
 
 In 2005, Applicant and his twin brother purchased a 107-acre real estate parcel. 
Applicant’s twin brother cashed in his retirement account to purchase the property. They 
receive $15,000 per year from commercial buildings on the property. In addition, they 
receive $4,000 from an electric company operating windmill generators on the property. 
(AX D, F and G; Tr. 43-45.) Applicant also receives income from several residential 
rental properties at various locations. (AX E.) 
 
3 
 
 In 2006, Applicant’s wife and stepson opened a restaurant. When his stepson 
was unable to repay a $125,000 loan he obtained to start the business, Applicant and 
his wife obtained a second mortgage on the family residence to repay the loan. In 
September 2012, Applicant and his wife sought to refinance the mortgage, but their 
application was rejected. Applicant is still paying off the second mortgage, and the 
payments are current. (Tr. 38-40; AX H.) Since 2010, he and his wife also have been 
paying a delinquent debt for uncollected state sales taxes resulting from the restaurant 
operation. As of the date of the hearing, the delinquent sales taxes had been reduced to 
about $10,000. (Tr. 83.) 
 
 Applicant also used his personal credit card to pay some of the expenses 
associated with the restaurant. The business failed, Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with 
cancer, and the credit-card account became delinquent. In September 2009, the 
account was charged off for $17,583. (GX 5 at 1; Tr. 80.) The debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c. 
 
 The financial drains of the restaurant operation caused Applicant and his wife to 
fall behind on their payments on their home loan and several credit-card accounts. 
Applicant disclosed in his SCA that several delinquent credit-card accounts were being 
resolved by a loan-consolidation program. The debts disclosed in his SCA were 
resolved and do not appear in his most recent CBR, except for the unresolved debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
During a personal subject interview (PSI) in September 2010, Applicant told the 
investigator that the credit-card debt in SOR ¶ 1.c had been included in a debt- 
consolidation plan and was being paid each month by an automatic $586 debit from his 
bank account. (GX 3 at 4.) However, his CBRs from February 2013, September 2014, 
and May 2015 reflected that the debt was not resolved. (GX 5 at 1; GX 6 at 2; GX 7 at 
3.) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he intended to resolve the debt by 
August 30, 2015. At the hearing, he admitted that he should have resolved the debt, but 
he relied on his wife, because she handled all financial matters. He had contacted the 
creditor but had not made any arrangements to resolve the debt. (Tr. 54-55, 109-10.)   
 
 In November 2013, Applicant entered into a contract to act as a purchasing agent 
for a car dealer (Dealer). Applicant testified that he agreed to purchase cars from other 
dealers in his own name, arrange for financing in his own name, and immediately 
deliver the cars to Dealer. He testified that Dealer agreed to deposit the money for a 
down payment into his checking account, pay him a commission upon delivery of the 
cars, and pay off the car loan within 30 days. (Tr. 35-36, 66-67.) He testified that Dealer 
told him that they needed a purchasing agent because traditional car dealers would not 
sell them cars if they knew the cars were intended for overseas resale. (Tr. 107.) He 
testified that he believed Dealer was a legitimate car dealer because he discovered it at 
a job fair where attendance was restricted to persons holding security clearances. (Tr. 
34, 105.) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s written contract with Dealer required him to “[n]egotiate with 
independent automobile dealerships with respect to prices, terms and deliveries for any 
and all automobiles” and to “[e]nter into purchasing contracts with automobile dealers 
utilizing [his] own credit worthiness and in [his] own name.” He was required to 
immediately transfer title of the automobiles to Dealer upon full payment of the 
automobile loan. (AX B at 1, paragraphs 3(a)-3(c).) The contract also provides that title 
to all vehicles purchased by a purchasing agent “shall immediately vest in [Dealer].” (AX 
B at 2, paragraph 6.) The written contract makes no mention of an obligation of Dealer 
to provide funds for the down payment or pay off the loan within 30 days.   
 
 In late November 2013, Applicant purchased a luxury car for Dealer. Dealer 
deposited $35,000 in Applicant’s bank account to cover the down payment, and 
Applicant financed the remaining $39,000 with a car loan in his own name. Applicant 
immediately delivered the car to Dealer, who paid him a commission of $1,250. Dealer 
did not pay off the loan. (Tr. 66-67.) The car has never been recovered. As of the date 
of the SOR, the loan was past due for $1,843, with a total balance due of $35,223. (GX 
7 at 2.) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he would resolve the debt by 
August 2016. The unresolved car loan is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 In October 2014, Applicant purchased another car for Dealer and financed the 
purchase with a car loan for $32,000 in his own name. Dealer paid Applicant $600 upon 
delivery of this car. Dealer did not make any payments on the car loan. The car was 
repossessed, but had not yet been auctioned at the time of the hearing. (Tr. 68-71.)  
 
Applicant testified that Dealer had agreed to make a $1,000 down payment on 
the second car. When he confronted Dealer about failing to make the down payment, 
the Dealer showed him documentation that the payment was made. Applicant became 
suspicious when Dealer showed him a FedEx receipt for the $1,000 down payment, 
because the receipt reflected that it was sent to a post office box, and Applicant knew 
that FedEx will not deliver to a post office box. In November 2014, Applicant went to 
Dealer’s office to confront him about his failure to honor the contract, and found that the 
office had been shut down. (Tr. 68-70.)  
 
As of the date of the SOR, the loan for the October 2014 purchase was past due 
for $2,686, with a total balance of $32,236. (GX 6 at 2.) In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he would resolve the debt by February 2016. The unresolved loan 
for this car is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
In December 2014, Applicant contacted the police. He testified that he believed 
there were more than 100 individuals defrauded by Dealer. He learned from the police 
that two shippers were trying to ship untitled cars overseas. (Tr. 73-74.)  
 
 Applicant’s twin brother is now disabled after suffering two heart attacks. He 
receives $2,400 per month in disability pay and lives with Applicant and his wife. (Tr. 
52.) He corroborated Applicant’s testimony about the two transactions with Dealer. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant and his wife enjoy foreign travel. Applicant flew from Iraq to meet his 
wife in the United Kingdom in 2005. They took one-week cruises to Mexico in 2006, the 
Caribbean in 2008, and South America in 2010. (GX 1 at 61-65; GX 3 at 3.) 
 
 In an effort to pay the family debts, Applicant has sought jobs in combat zones. 
While deployed to Iraq from November 2004 to December 2005, he earned $220,000 
per year. He earned $168,000 per year while deployed again from April 2010 to 
December 2012. He testified that his wife spent the extra money he earned while 
deployed, but he did not know what she did with it. (Tr. 88-92.)  
 
Applicant currently earns $105,000 per year as a federal contractor. With his 
additional rental income from various sources, he has a net monthly remainder of about 
$4,300. He keeps about $200 of his pay for himself each month, but his wife controls all 
the family spending, and he is unable to account for the money he earns. (Tr. 100-01.)  
 
Applicant’s wife has suffered from cancer since about 2010. She also suffers 
from depression. She initially intended to testify at the hearing, but she was on 
medication and emotionally distraught to the extent that Applicant’s counsel decided at 
the last minute to not call her as a witness. (Tr. 125.) 
 
 One of Applicant’s colleagues, who has known him for about 15 years, testified 
that he was somewhat familiar with Applicant’s business ventures, but he has never 
known Applicant to exhibit poor self-control, poor judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations. He considers Applicant to be truthful and trustworthy. (Tr. 121-
22.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
6 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
7 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s CBRs, PSIs, and his testimony at the hearing reflect recurring 
financial problems and instances of bad business judgment that are not alleged in the 
SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s 
credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person 
analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I 
have considered the evidence of unalleged financial problems for these limited 
purposes. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the documentary evidence introduced at 
the hearing, establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
8 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. Applicant’s debts are recent and numerous, 
but the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. The 
fraudulent scheme perpetrated by Dealer was a circumstance beyond Applicant’s 
control, and he acted responsibly by notifying the police as soon as he realized that he 
was a victim of fraud. He has not taken any steps to resolve the two delinquent car 
loans, but his failure to pay the delinquent car loans under the circumstances of this 
case does not raise questions about the his current reliability or trustworthiness. To the 
extent that Applicant demonstrated bad business judgment and financial naiveté, he has 
learned his lesson. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established for the credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The 
failure of his wife’s business and his wife’s illness were circumstances largely beyond 
his control. However, Applicant has not acted responsibly regarding this debt. He knew 
as early as the 2010 PSI that the debt raised security concerns, and he claimed that it 
was resolved by his debt-consolidation plan. When he received the SOR, he was on 
notice that the debt was not resolved, but he took no meaningful steps to resolve it. He 
admitted at the hearing that he should have attended to it. He also admitted that he has 
a substantial net remainder each month that could be used to resolve the debt. When 
the record closed on November 6, 2015, he still had provided no evidence of actions to 
resolve it.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not established. Applicant presented no 
evidence of financial counseling, and his financial situation is not under control. He has 
not made a good-faith effort to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He has not disputed any 
of the debts. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
9 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for federal contractors and held a security clearance for 
many years. He was candid and sincere at the hearing. However, he also has a long 
history of financial problems. To his credit, he has resolved most of the debts that he 
disclosed in his SCA. He has mitigated the security concerns raised by the delinquent 
car loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
  
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Ordinarily, failure to resolve the remaining debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c would not necessarily be an impediment to continuing Applicant’s 
security clearance, but his history of financial problems, total lack of involvement in his 
family finances, and inexplicable failure to take meaningful steps to resolve the credit- 
card debt, which has been delinquent since 2009, raise serious doubts about his current 
trustworthiness and reliability.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
