1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-05791
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but failed to
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On January 5, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On April 10, 2015, Applicant
answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations except subparagraphs 1.d and 2.a.
He requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on July 18, 2015.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 3, 2015, scheduling the hearing for
September 3, 2015. After a continuance, the case was rescheduled for September 28,
2
 
2015.  The hearing was held as rescheduled. At the hearing, I received five Government
exhibits (GE 1 - GE 5), and five Applicant exhibits (AE A - AE C).  DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old married man with three adult children. He quit school in
the 12  grade. (Tr. 17) Since 2012, he has worked for a defense contractor as ath
custodian and maintenance man. (Tr. 18) The executive director of Applicant’s company
characterizes him as “a valuable team member with an untiring work ethic and a can-do
attitude.” (AE A)
Between 2007 and 2012, Applicant incurred approximately $40,000 of delinquent
debt. Five of these debts, totalling approximately $18,000, ultimately resulted in
judgments for non-payment entered against him (SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e).
Applicant’s inability to pay his debts corresponded with his wife’s medical problems.
Specifically, in the mid-2000s, she began suffering from degenerative arthritis. (Tr. 47) It
got progressively worse, rendering her unable to work by 2007. Although she had
disability insurance, it was insufficient to help allay her medical costs. Applicant was a
construction worker at or about the time his wife’s health deteriorated. As the economy
worsened after 2008, his work became more sporadic. (Tr. 19) Consequently, Applicant
and his wife began struggling to make ends meet. 
Unable to make the minimum monthly payments on the debts, Applicant’s wife,
who handled their finances, paid “what she could.” (Tr. 34) In the fall of  2014, Applicant
and his wife met with a credit counselor to consider consolidating their debts. (Tr. 50)
After evaluating their credit report, the counselor concluded that their best option was to
file a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Tr. 35; 51) 
Subsequently, in November 2014, Applicant and his wife filed for federal
bankruptcy protection. They reported $63,054 in unsecured debts and $276,213 of
secured debt including his home and one of his automobiles. (GE 4 at 69) All of the
SOR delinquencies were included in the bankruptcy petition. On February 10, 2015, the
bankruptcy court discharged Applicant’s debts. (GE 5)
Applicant has not incurred any new delinquencies since beginning his current job
in 2012. His income is no longer variable, as it was when he worked in the construction
business. He keeps a budget. He has approximately $1,100 of monthly discretionary
income, $1,800 in savings, and $3,000 invested in a 401(k) retirement account. (Tr. 31-
32)
In May 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application. The question
set forth in Section 26 asked whether any judgment had been entered against him,
whether any loan had been in default, and whether any bill had been turned over to a
collection agent. Section 26 also required applicants to disclose whether any credit
account had been suspended, charged off or cancelled within the past seven years, or
3
 
whether any debt was currently 120 days delinquent. Applicant answered “no” to all of
these questions. Applicant contends that he was unaware of the extent of his
delinquencies when he completed the security clearance application because his wife
handled their finances. Also, he contends that because he and his wife had been
steadily making less-than-minimum payments, he thought his bills were behind, but not
in default.  (Tr. 34) 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Between 2007 and 2012 Applicant incurred $40,000 of delinquent debt. AG ¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
4
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems began when his wife in 2007 developed chronic
arthritis that ultimately prevented her from working. His financial problems worsened
when an ensuing economic downturn led to increasingly erratic hours at his construction
job. Since beginning his current job in 2012, Applicant’s work hours and pay have
stabilized. After consulting a credit counselor in November 2014 to inquire about a debt
consolidation program, he was advised to file for a Chapter 7 discharge of his debts.
Following the counselor’s advice, Applicant filed the bankruptcy petition, whereupon his
debts were discharged in February 2015. (GE 5)
Applicant has not incurred any additional delinquencies since the bankruptcy
discharge. Currently, he keeps a budget, has approximately $1,100 of after-expense
income, $1,800 in savings, and $3,000 invested in a retirement account. I conclude that
all of the mitigating conditions apply, as set forth above.
Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candidi
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process.” (AG ¶ 15) 
Applicant’s failure to disclose his delinquent debts on his 2014 security clearance
application raises the issue of whether  AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment,
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. Five of Applicant’s debts
led to lawsuits and eventual judgments against him. Given the notice requirements
necessary to proceed with lawsuits, it is difficult to believe that Applicant could have no
idea that he had any outstanding judgments against him when he completed his
security clearance application. His incredulous explanation for failing to disclose the
judgments undercuts his explanation for not disclosing his other delinquent debts.
Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation.
5
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial problems. I was
particularly cognizant of his vulnerability, as someone who did not finish high school, to
economic downturns. Notwithstanding these factors, Applicant had a duty to provide
truthful, frank, and candid responses when he completed his security clearance
application. He failed to do this. Consequently, his application for a security clearance
must be denied.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
6
 
