 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-06940 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 27, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 15, 2015 the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, J, and E. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 29, 2015. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On August 17, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 4, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
was provided to the Applicant on August 19, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on September 3, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed 
that would have expired on October 3, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management in November 2012. Applicant did not adopt it as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on November 9, 2015. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Paragraph 1. He neither admitted nor 
denied the allegations Paragraphs 2 and 3 that refer to the allegations in Paragraph 1 
and charge the same acts as criminal conduct and personal conduct. Therefore, the 
absent answers will be treated as if he denied them. (Items 1, 2)  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is married and has two children. He works for a 
defense contractor and has since 1991. (Item 3) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
September 1979 to approximately August 2012 (Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant admits 
that allegation. Then the SOR alleges Applicant bought marijuana from about 
September 1979 to August 2012 (Subparagraph 1.b). Applicant admits that allegation. 
Next, the SOR alleges Applicant intends to continue using marijuana in the future 
(Subparagraph 1.c). He admits that allegation. After Applicant received his Department 
of Defense security clearance on or about November 30, 2001,  he continued to smoke 
marijuana (Subparagraph 1.d). Finally, Applicant was charged with unlawful possession 
of less than 8.5 grams of marijuana by municipal police in his home city in 
approximately November 2010 (Subparagraph 1.e). (Items 1-3 at Section 23) 
 
 Applicant likes to smoke marijuana. When he bike rides, hikes, or back packs on 
a trip he likes to use marijuana because it makes these trips more enjoyable. He also 
claims to have pudendal neuralgia1, a medical condition that he claims benefits from 
marijuana use. Applicant does not explain how that works. He did not submit a medical 
                                            
1 The pudendal nerve runs through the buttocks and into the perineum of the body. The neuralgia is a disorder of this nerve. One 
cause of it is excessive sitting as bicyclists do. (see Pain.about.com) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
statement from his physician about it. His Answer also claims he has a medical 
marijuana card and his physician’s recommendation that he use marijuana within his 
state. He also admits he was charged with the possession of marijuana a few months 
before he first obtained his medical marijuana card. Applicant claims he has a 
“wonderful family life” and a successful career. He does not think smoking marijuana 
adversely affects his family or professional life.  (Item 3 at Sections 23 and 25) 
 
 In Section 23 of his e-QIP Applicant denies using marijuana during the period he 
held a security clearance from 2001 onward. (Item 3 at Section 23) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any statements on his behalf other than his comments in 
his Answer written on the SOR. (Items 1, 2) 
 
     Applicant did not provide any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four of the eight conditions apply: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant abuses marijuana as defined in the guideline in AG ¶ 24(a) and (b). He 
admits smoking marijuana since 1979. AG ¶ 25(a) is established.  
 
 Applicant obtained and thereby possessed the marijuana he used. AG ¶ 25(c) is 
established by his admissions and his e-QIP answers. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana while he held a security clearance. That was issued to 
him in 2001 and he admits using marijuana at least until August 2012. AG ¶ 25(g) is 
established.  
 
 Applicant’s Answer and his answers to the e-QIP questions show he thinks there 
is medical benefit and a pleasure component to smoking marijuana. Under Federal law 
the use, possession, sale, growing, and purchase of marijuana is a violation of law. His 
statements in those two above-referenced documents show he has the expressed intent 
to continue using marijuana because he thinks it provides him with various benefits. AG 
¶ 25(h) is established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of them apply to Applicant. His marijuana use is current and frequent, and 
the circumstances are not unusual. AG ¶ 26(a) is not established.  
 
 Applicant has not demonstrated an intent not to abuse marijuana in the future. In 
fact, exactly the opposite intent was clearly stated in the Answer and e-QIP. He has a 
medical marijuana card for his buttocks pain, demonstrating a clear intent to continue to 
use marijuana. In addition, he uses it for pleasure and does not think it adversely affects 
his family or employment. AG ¶ 26(b) is not established.  
 
 The remaining two mitigating conditions pertain to prescription drugs and 
participation in a drug rehabilitation program. Neither situation occurred in Applicant’s 
life, so AG ¶ 26(c) and (d) are not established.   
  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and   
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;)  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant committed a series of lesser offenses by smoking marijuana for 
33 years. He was charged with unlawful possession of less than 8.5 grams in 
November 2010.  AG ¶ 31(a) is established.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant admitted smoking marijuana from 1979 at least until August 
2012 and does not believe there is anything wrong with his actions. AG ¶ 31(c) is 
established.  
 
 None of the remaining three disqualifying conditions apply based on the 
facts in this case. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 None of them are established in Applicant’s situation. His use of marijuana is 
recent and recurring. He intends to continue using it. He admits his use of marijuana, so 
there is evidence he committed the offenses. There is no evidence of any rehabilitation 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two may apply: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana since 1979 and continued use is personal conduct 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because if his 
employer knew he was smoking marijuana while holding a security clearance it would 
affect Applicant’s personal, professional, and community standing. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
established.  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana by getting it from vendors or friends. If they and he 
possessed or transferred marijuana, then they engaged in criminal activity as stated in 
the guideline and Federal law. AG ¶ 16(g) is established.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two may 
apply: 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Applicant continues to use marijuana, ostensibly because it  causes him no harm 
and helps him endure his pudendal neuralgia. His continued use of marijuana does not 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
establish AG ¶ 17(e) because no positive steps have been taken to reduce vulnerability 
to exploitation or duress.  
 
 Applicant continues his same course of action, including associating with his 
friends. He has not shown that he will change his associates or anything else 
associated with his marijuana use. AG ¶ 17(g) does not apply. 
 
 None of the other mitigating conditions are established clearly or are relevant to 
Applicant’s situation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he started 
smoking marijuana. He held a security clearance while doing so since 2001. He 
expressed pleasure and offered medical reasons for continuing to use marijuana. 
Applicant does not see anything wrong with smoking marijuana. None of his medical 
explanations were supported by competent medical authorities. His smoking will 
continue by his declaration. There is no rehabilitation undertaken or planned.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, or Personal Conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
