1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05955
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Nina Marino, Esquire
January 22, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 5, 2013.  On April 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
B and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 19, 2015.  He answered the
SOR in writing on June 1, 2015, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request
soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on August 18, 2015.  I granted
Applicant’s counsel’s request for a delay until October 28, 2015, in order for his counsel
to be available.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 28, 2015, and I
2
convened the hearing as scheduled on October 28, 2015.  The Government offered
Exhibits (GX) 1, which was received without objection.  Applicant testified on his own
behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through L, which were received without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on November 6, 2015.  I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until November 30, 2015, to submit
additional matters.  On November 30, 2015, he submitted Exhibit M, which was
received without objection.  The record closed on November 30, 2015.  Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion In Limine
At the hearing, Applicant made a Motion In Limine to exclude evidence of failed
polygraph examinations. (TR at page 11 line 18 to page 12 line 8).  That motion was
denied in favor of a full administrative record.  Furthermore, Department Counsel
offered no such evidence.
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing Subparagraph
2.a., which alleged Personal Conduct under Guideline E.  There being no objection, the
SOR was so amended.  (TR at page 10 line 19 to page 11 line 17.)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
remaining Subparagraphs of the SOR, 1.a.~1.f. with explanations.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Applicant has a Doctorate in computer science, has worked for a government
contractor for “twenty-eight years,” and has had no security clearance violations.  (TR at
page 146 line 13 to page 157 line 3, and GX 1 at page 11.)  He is a native-born
American, and has no foreign property or business interests.  (TR at page 179 lines
4~14, and GX 1 at page 5.)  
1.a.  Applicant’s spouse is dual national of Taiwan and of the United States.  (GX
1 at pages 14~16.)  She is willing to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship.  (TR at page
86 lines 4~9.)  She is “Doctor of Oriental Medicine,” who’s income exceeds that of her
husband, and she has no foreign property interest.  (TR at page 160 lines 4~19, at page
177 lines 9~14, and AppXs I and G.)  His wife earns between $200,000~$400,000 a
year, whereas Applicant’s annual income is about $180,000.  (TR at page 177 lines
9~14.)  Their net worth in the United States is in excess of $1,000,000.  (AppX B.)
3
1.b., 1.d. and 1.f.  Applicant’s mother-in-law and three brothers-in-law own a fish
farm in Taiwan.  (AppX G.)  They are all citizens and residents of Taiwan.  Since about
2003, he and his spouse, have contributed about $150,000 to his mother-in-law to cover
unexpected occurrences, such as a 2009 typhoon.  (TR at page 118 line 7 to page 119
line 25, at page 121 line 11 to page 123 line 10, at page 135 line 11 to page 137 line 1,
and AppX H~J.)  He has visited Taiwan about 12 times since 1989.  (TR at page 167
line 7 to page 168 line 4.)  Although they stay with her family during these short 4~5 day
visits; due to the language barrier, his interaction with his Taiwanese in-laws is limited.
(Id, and TR at 170 line 14~20.)  They do not know what Applicant “does for a living,”
(TR at page 106 line 21 to page 107 line 22), and they are not connected to any foreign
government  (TR at page 140 line 20 to page 141 line 2.)
1.c.  Applicant has two nephews who also work on the family fish farm.  (TR at
page 103 line 6 to page 104 line 24, and at page 106 line 21 to page 107 line 22.)
Again due to the language barrier, Applicant’s interaction with his nephews is limited.
(TR at page 170 line 14~20.)  They do not know what Applicant “does for a living,”  (TR
at page 106 line 21 to page 107 line 22), and they are not connected to any foreign
government.  (TR at page 140 line 20 to page 141 line 2.)
1.e.  Applicant has little or no interaction with the other Taiwanese nationals that
he delineated on his e-QIP.  (TR at page 171 line 20 to page 172 line 5, and GX 1 at
page 22.)
I also take administrative notice of the following facts.  Taiwan, according to a
2008 report to Congress, was involved in criminal espionage and export controls cases.
There have been numerous cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal
export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Paragraph 6 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating
to Foreign Influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign interests, may be manipulated or induced
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that
is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by a
foreign interest.
Here, Paragraph 7(a) is arguably applicable: “contacts with a foreign family
member . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.”  Applicant’s wife is a dual national; and his mother-in-law, brothers-in-law and
5
nephews are citizens and residents of Taiwan.  This is clearly countered, however, by
the first mitigating condition 8(a), as“the nature of the relationships with foreign persons,
. . . are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign individual . . . and the interests of the U.S.”
Applicant’s wife is willing to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship, and he has little
interaction with his Taiwanese in-laws, due to the language barrier, even when he visits
them in Taiwan.  Furthermore, his in-laws have little knowledge about his employment,
and are not connected with the Taiwanese government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The record shows that the Applicant is well respected in the work place, as
evidenced by the testimony of his colleagues (TR at page 25 line 2 to page 78 line 6),
and by numerous letters of recommendation (AppX C) and by his numerous accolades
in his field of expertise (AppXs D and E.)
I have considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns
arising from his alleged Foreign Influence.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
