 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02300 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: J. Wyndal Gordon, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old senior project manager employed with a federal 
contractor. His financial problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond his 
control. He established financial responsibility by maintaining contact with his creditors, 
disputing some of his debts, and addressing his financial obligations. Clearance 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 24, 2013. On 
October 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. The Defense Office 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for August 13, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
testified and submitted 16 exhibits (AE 1 through 16). AE 16 was initially offered, but 
later withdrawn. All exhibits were admitted without objection, except for AE 16 that was 
withdrawn. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant admitted the SOR factual 
allegations with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, including his 
testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old senior project manager working for a federal 
contractor. He received his bachelor’s degree in computer information systems in May 
1990. He married in July 1996, and divorced in August 2012. He has two children from 
this marriage, ages 9 and 15, for whom he provides financial support.  
 
Applicant has possessed a security clearance since 2000, resulting from his 
employment with federal contractors. In 2003, Applicant, his wife, and another couple 
established a company to do business with federal and state governments. He averred 
that the company held a facility top secret clearance, and that he also held a top secret 
clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). (Tr. 39) Except for 
the pending SOR allegations, there is no evidence to show that Applicant has been 
involved in any other issues of security concern.  
 
Applicant explained that in 2007-2008, his company’s client (a federal agency) 
stopped all payments to the company during a four-month period while undergoing the 
implementation of a new payment system. Without the contract revenue, the company 
could not pay its employees’ salaries. Applicant and his partners did not want to lay off 
their employees because of their technical expertise and the anticipated revenues the 
company would receive in the near future. Applicant withdrew money from his and his 
ex-wife’s 401(k) retirement accounts to pay their employees’ salaries. Additionally, 
Applicant claimed that he opened and personally guaranteed a business line of credit 
loan with a bank (SOR ¶ 1.a) to float the company’s employees’ salaries and the 
company’s operational expenses.  
 
Applicant and his partners did not have sufficient money to pay their employees’ 
salaries and their taxes. They made the decision to pay their employees’ salaries first 
and withheld paying their employees’ taxes until after they received their anticipated 
contract revenues. As a result, the company acquired approximately a $400,000 federal 
tax deficiency. In 2009-2010, the IRS started its collection efforts. Applicant established 
a payment plan with the IRS and paid approximately $300,000 of the tax debt. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In 2010-2011, a rift developed between Applicant, his then wife, and his business 
partners. According to Applicant, his partners took control of the company and its 
financial accounts, and he was unable to continue making the scheduled payments to 
the IRS. He claimed that his partners received revenues from their contracts, but 
diverted the company’s revenues for their personal gain and failed to continue making 
payments to the IRS. Applicant contacted the IRS in February 2012, and informed the 
IRS of his problems with his business partners and requested to be released from 
liability. The IRS denied Applicant’s request because he and his business partners are 
considered by the IRS to be jointly and severally liable for all of their employees’ 
delinquent taxes. 
 
Applicant submitted documents to show his efforts to regain control of the 
company. In 2011, he filed criminal charges against his business partners. When the 
charges were dismissed, he filed a civil suit trying to prevent his business partners from 
taking over the company. (GE 2) In January 2012, Applicant and his business partners 
entered into a mediation agreement. In the document, his business partners agreed that 
the company was responsible for its IRS tax debt, and that the company would 
reimburse Applicant for about $20,000 in billable hours. The mediation agreement was 
silent about Applicant’s business loan (SOR ¶ 1.a). (AE 5) 
 
In September 2013, March 2014, and November 2014, Applicant demanded that 
his business partners pay the IRS debt and the line of credit loan Applicant obtained in 
2008 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). (AE 10-12) 
 
The status of the alleged SOR delinquent accounts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a $106,214 charged-off bank account. As previously stated, 
Applicant claimed that this was a corporate debt – a line of credit for the company that 
he opened in 2007-2008, and personally guaranteed. Apparently, the line of credit was 
later converted into a credit card account.  
 
Applicant claimed his business partners initially agreed to reimburse him for the 
line of credit debt, but later reneged on their promise. Applicant averred that he started 
negotiations with the bank in 2010 trying to settle the account, but without success. His 
negotiations were over the telephone and he has no documentary evidence of his 
contacts with the bank. In his answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant again 
claimed that he had recently sent another settlement offer to the bank and he was 
waiting for their response. At his hearing, Applicant stated that the debt had been 
removed from his credit report.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a $50 collection on behalf of a telephone service provider. 
Applicant explained that the debt became delinquent because of his oversight. He paid 
the debt in March 2015. (AE 13)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleged a $22,000 legal fee in collection by the law firm that 
represented Applicant in his civil suit against his business partners. Applicant paid the 
debt on February 12, 2015. (AE 7)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleged Applicant owed a $120,000 tax debt to the IRS for unpaid 
business taxes for tax years 2008 and 2009. Applicant admitted the debt and explained 
that he and his business partners were “jointly and severally” liable to the IRS for unpaid 
business taxes.  
 
Applicant retained the services of a certified public accountant and a tax attorney 
to help him dispute the tax debt. At his hearing, he testified that he recently exhausted 
all of his appeals with the IRS, and instructed his attorney to make arrangements to 
establish a payment plan. He made two payments to the IRS in May and July 2015. (AE 
14) Applicant has accepted responsibility for his participation in creating this debt. He 
believes that he has been diligently working to resolve the debt.  
 
Applicant also believes that his work history and past behavior show that he has 
been a reliable, trustworthy, and responsible federal contractor and employee. There is 
no evidence to show that he has any other outstanding IRS debts or that he has failed 
to timely file or pay his taxes, except for the SOR allegation.  
 
Applicant believes he has learned a valuable lesson, and he promised never to 
repeat the mistake of not paying his employees’ taxes. He established a new company 
in 2011, and retained the services of a certified public accountant to make sure all tax 
payments are made in accordance with the law.  
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial situation and accepted 
responsibility for his financial problems. He believes that he has been truthful and 
forthcoming during the security clearance process. He has learned a valuable lesson by 
going through the security clearance process. He understands that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility for him to be eligible for a security clearance. Applicant 
believes that with his anticipated earnings from his job with the federal contractor, he 
will not have any problems paying his debts and current living expenses. He promised 
to maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that included a $106,000 charged-
off line of credit loan, two personal debts for about $22,000, and a $120,000 IRS unpaid 
business tax debt. Financial considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing 
and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial problems were caused or 
aggravated, in part, by the period during which the company was not being paid by its 
client, and the takeover of the company by his business partners. (However, Applicant’s 
illegal withholding of his employees’ taxes also aggravated his financial problems.) 
Applicant filed criminal charges and a civil suit against his business partners trying to 
recover control of the company. He maintained contact with the IRS and the bank, and 
has continued his efforts to resolve the debts. He disputed his financial liability; 
however, now that the disputes have been resolved against him, Applicant made two 
payments to the IRS and promised to establish payment plans with the IRS and with the 
bank. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant has shown sufficient 
financial responsibility for AG ¶ 20(b) to apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. Applicant efforts to resolve the debts started in 2009-
2010. He obtained financial counseling from a certified public accountant and retained 
an attorney to assist him in resolving his financial problems. He paid two of the SOR 
debts, and made two payments to the IRS. Applicant has gained a better grasp of his 
financial situation and his finances are under control.  
 
 With his current job earnings, Applicant will be able to establish viable payment 
plans to address his remaining delinquencies. The credit reports in evidence show that 
he is not living beyond his means, and he has no new delinquent debs. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant has shown financial responsibility and sufficient 
progress in the resolution of his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His financial 
problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond his control. He established 
financial responsibility by maintaining contact with his creditors, paying two debts, and 
addressing his legal obligations. He understands that he is required to maintain financial 
responsibility for him to be eligible for a security clearance. I believe Applicant will 
continue to responsibly pay his debts and maintain his financial responsibilities. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
