 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 14-03098 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin Kersey, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines B 
(foreign influence) and C (foreign preference), but failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
the security concerns under Guidelines B, C, and E. This action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On April 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 6, 2015. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on July 20, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through I. The record of the hearing was left open until August 3, 2015, to provide 
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted 
documents that have been marked as AE J through L. Department Counsel’s objection 
to AE L (Applicant’s sworn statement) was overruled, and it was admitted into evidence. 
All other exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2015. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement in ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive.1 
 
 Department Counsel requested administrative notice be taken of facts 
concerning Iran. Applicant had no objection to that request, and it was granted. 
Pertinent facts concerning Iran are set forth below.2 
 
 Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw two falsification allegations 
(SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.f). Applicant had no objection to that motion. The motion was 
granted and those allegations were withdrawn.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
SOR and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR 
 
 The SOR alleged under Guideline B that Applicant has several relatives, 
including three aunts, one uncle, and one niece, who are citizens and residents of Iran 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and that his father is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran, resides in 
the United States, and served in the Iranian military (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under Guideline C, 
the SOR asserted that Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in April 2001 and had it 
extended from April 2006 to April 2011 (SOR ¶ 2.a) and that he used his Iranian 
passport to travel to Iran (SOR ¶ 2.b). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that 
Applicant falsified his responses to seven questions in security clearance applications 
(SCA) submitted in 2005 and 2010. Those questions dealt with foreign citizenship, 
foreign passports, and contacts with foreign nationals and representatives of foreign 
governments. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline B and C 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11-12. 
 
2 Tr.12, 25-27. 
 
3 Tr. 12-13. 
 
 
3 
 
 
allegations and denied the Guideline E allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.4 
 
Applicant’s Background, Foreign Contacts, and Foreign Travel 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
for his current employer in July 2015. He has worked for defense contractors since 
2004. He was born in the United States, graduated from high school in 1998, earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2004, and master’s degrees in 2006 and 2007. He completed both 
master’s degrees with honors. He married in 2002. His wife was born in the United 
States. They have two children, ages 10 and 12, who were born in the United States. 
He has held a security clearance since about 2005.5  
 
Applicant’s father was born in Iran and is 63 years old. He completed mandatory 
military service in Iran. It is unclear whether his served two or four years in the Iranian 
military. He was born Muslim and, at some point, converted to another religion. 
Applicant indicated his father came to the United States for religious reasons. He 
entered the United States on a student visa in about 1975. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in engineering while working full-time in a restaurant. He became a U.S. citizen 
in 1984 and apparently remained a citizen of Iran. He has resided in the United States 
for the past 40 years, has worked for U.S. defense contractors for the past 30 years, 
and has held a security clearance. When Applicant was born his father was an Iranian 
citizen, and Applicant obtained Iranian citizenship through his father. Applicant’s mother 
was born in the United States. She met her husband while he was working in the 
restaurant. She is an officer in a U.S. bank.6 
 
Applicant’s father is the youngest child in his family. Some of his siblings are 
deceased. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had three aunts, an uncle, and a niece 
who are citizens and residents of Iran. Applicant indicated that none of those relatives 
have ever worked for a foreign government or served in a foreign military. Applicant 
described his aunts and uncle as elderly and poor. In an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interview in June 2012, he indicated that one of his deceased 
uncles had a military career in Iran, but did not indicate the uncle’s rank. He also did not 
address how his surviving uncle avoided mandatory military service.7    
 
Applicant indicated that his father was considered a defector by his family 
because of his religious conversion. After coming to the United States, his father did not 
return to Iran for about 15 years, but has since returned on a number of occasions. 
Applicant traveled to Iran with his father and mother in 1982, 2006, and 2007. He would 
                                                          
4 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 Tr. 7-8, 57-63, 69, 96-97, 110-113, 120; GE 1-4; AE A, I. 
 
6 Tr. 57-59, 71, 93-96, 113-121, 145-149; GE 1-4, 6.  
 
7 Tr. 71-73, 79-85, 93-96, 118; GE 4, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
have been a toddler when they traveled to Iran in 1982. He stated that he traveled to 
Iran in 2006 and 2007 because his father was in poor health, and he wanted to be 
available in case his father needed help. Applicant does not speak or read Farsi. His 
relatives in Iran do not speak English. Language differences limited his ability to interact 
with his Iranian relatives. Applicant has not had any contact with his Iranian relatives 
since he visited there in 2007. In his SCA submitted on April 7, 2010, Applicant 
disclosed his travel to Iran in 2006 and 2007. Prior to traveling to Iran, he also disclosed 
his plans to travel there to his facility security officer. He testified that he has no intent to 
return to Iran.8  
 
In his 2010 SCA, Applicant responded “No” to the question that asked whether 
he had close or continuing contact with foreign nationals in the last seven years with 
whom he was bound by affection, influence, or obligation. He testified that response is 
still correct. He did not consider that he had a close or continuing contact with his aunts, 
uncle, or niece in Iran and noted he has no continuing contact with them.9  
 
Failure to Disclose Foreign Citizenship and Foreign Passport 
 
Applicant was issued an Iranian passport on April 27, 2001. The passport was 
extended on July 10, 2006 and expired on April 25, 2011. In 2006 and 2007, he entered 
Iran through the use of his Iranian passport. Applicant testified that he believed his 
picture in the passport was from 2006, instead of 2001. He did not remember having 
that picture taken. Included in the passport are pictures of his children, who were born 
after it was initially issued, and were most likely added to his passport in 2006. In his 
post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a letter from his facility security officer 
confirming that he surrendered his expired Iranian passport. Applicant indicated that he 
is willing to renounce his Iranian citizenship.10  
 
In his SCAs submitted on August 18, 2005, and April 7, 2010, Applicant 
responded “No” to questions that asked whether he ever held multiple citizenships or 
held an active passport from a foreign country. In his 2005 SCA, he responded “No” to 
the question that asked whether he ever had contact with a foreign government, its 
establishments (embassies or consulates) or its representatives other than on official 
U.S. business. In his 2010 SCA, he did not answer the question in Section 10c that 
asked whether his non-U.S. citizenship was based on his birth in a foreign country or 
the citizenship of his parents.11 
                                                          
8 Tr. 70-85, 96, 113-121, 133, 137; GE 3, 4. In GE 3, Applicant reportedly stated his niece could speak 
English. In GE 6, he stated that his Iranian relatives only spoke Farsi. 
 
9 Tr. 76-85, 142-144; GE 3. 
 
10 Tr. 99-110, 124-125, 126-127, 130-141, 148-154; GE 4-6; AE K. Applicant’s mother may have taken 
the passport photographs of him and his children at the bank in which she works. In GE 6, Applicant 
indicated that he did not believe his father was a dual citizen. 
 
11 GE 1, 3. In his 2010 SCA, he was only required to answer the question in Section 10c if he responded 
“Yes” to the question in Section 10 that asked if he then held or ever held multiple citizenships.  
 
5 
 
 
 During OPM interviews in May 2010 and June 2012, Applicant discussed his two 
most recent trips to Iran. The summaries of those interviews, however, do not address 
either his dual citizenship or Iranian passport. In a sworn affidavit in May 2011, he again 
addressed his trips to Iran, but did not mention his dual citizenship or Iranian passport.12 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant addressed the falsification allegations for 
failing to disclose his Iranian passport in his 2005 and 2010 SCAs by stating,  
 
I deny – no attempt to conceal existence of an Iranian passport was 
intended. I did not reconcile or consider the Iranian passport when 
completing the e-QIP. [Emphasis added.] All correspondence was 
performed by my father or alternative individual, I did not personally 
complete/submit, nor have knowledge of those activities. Further, due to 
language barriers, I also do not have the ability to review/confirm any of 
that correspondence. 
 
His failure to “reconcile or consider” the Iranian passport implies that he was aware of 
its existence when he submitted the SCAs but overlooked it.13 
 
 In his SOR Answer, he addressed the falsification allegation for failing to disclose 
his dual citizenship in his 2010 SCA by stating, 
 
I deny – no attempt to conceal citizenship was intended. It was not my 
understanding that possession of an Iranian passport constituted dual 
citizenship. Subsequent to April 7, 2010, I learned of this dual-citizenship 
and have openly and honestly disclosed that since. All correspondence 
was performed by my father or alternative individual, I did not personally 
complete/submit, nor have knowledge of those activities.  
 
This response raises the question of why he would state that he did not understand 
possession of an Iranian passport constituted dual citizenship unless he was aware of 
the passport when he completed the 2010 SCA.14  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant stated that he believed his responses on the SCAs 
were complete and accurate when submitted. He acknowledged that, in retrospect, he 
was ignorant of aspects of dual citizenship and passports. He stated that he did not 
apply for the Iranian passport and believed his father handled all of the paperwork for 
his passport and dealt with the foreign issuing officials. The “holder’s signature” in the 
passport is written in Farsi. Applicant stated that he did not sign any documents for the 
                                                          
12 GE 4, 6.  
 
13 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. The term “e-QIP” means Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing and is synonymous with SCA. 
 
14 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
6 
 
 
initial passport or its extension. He did not remember giving a picture to his father for the 
passport.15 
  
 Applicant testified his parents handled all of the travel documents, including his 
U.S. passport, during their trips to Iran. He remembered seeing his U.S. passport during 
one of the trips, indicated he did not like his photo in that passport, but also noted he did 
not pay attention to the documents on the trips. He stated, “There was a big collection of 
documents and they were always handled together by my parents . . . .” When asked 
whether he presented his U.S. passport or Iranian passport during a layover in 
Germany, Applicant responded, “I don’t remember.” His father dealt with the Iranian 
immigration officials during their trips.16 
 
 Applicant further testified “I actually did not know I had it [his Iranian passport] 
until I was doing all the research for these security investigations.” He also stated that 
he could not recall exactly when he learned of his Iranian passport, but believed it was 
within two years of the hearing. Upon learning of the passport, he stated that he 
provided a copy to the government. When asked whether he was aware of the Iranian 
passport when he filled out his 2010 SCA, he stated, “I don’t believe so” and noted he 
simply did not think about it.17 
 
Additionally, Applicant testified that his father told him Iran could force him into its 
military while he was in that country. He stated that he first had that discussion with his 
father when he was a teenager. He did not associate compulsory military service with 
citizenship and indicated he “didn’t think these things through.”18 
 
 In his post-hearing submission, Applicant stated that he was selected for an 
executive level position in October 2013. As part of the selection process, he was 
required to provide extensive paperwork to a third-party screening company. In 
preparing his responses for the screening company, he met with his parents and 
learned of the Iranian passport. About a month later, he provided a copy of the Iranian 
passport to DOD CAF in response to interrogatories that specifically asked whether he 
had a foreign passport.19 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. 75-76, 96-102, 104-110, 124-145, 136-137; GE 5. 
 
16 Tr. 75-76, 96-102, 104-110, 124-145, 136-137. Applicant’s U.S. and Iranian passport were both issued 
in April 2001. See GE 3. 
 
17 Tr. 75-76, 96-102, 104-110, 124-145, 136-137. 
 
18 Tr. 108-109, 128-130. 
 
19 AE K.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Iran 
 
The United States and Iran do not maintain diplomatic relations. Iran is a foreign 
intelligence threat to the U.S. and has developed cyber espionage or attack capabilities 
that could be used against this country. Iran continues to act abroad in ways that run 
counter to U.S. interests and that worsen regional conflicts. The U.S. State Department 
has designated Iran as a State Sponsor of Terrorism. Iran has a poor human rights 
record.20 
 
Character Evidence and U.S. Interests 
 
Applicant worked while attending school and was responsible for paying his 
educational expenses. He acquired about $71,000 in student loans that he has already 
repaid. He owns a home in the United States and estimated his net worth to be 
approximately $850,000. In 2014, his adjusted gross income was approximately 
$260,000. He has filed and paid his income taxes as required. He has no financial 
interests outside the United States.21 
 
  Applicant has consistently received work evaluations that praise his performance.  
He has been described as a model of personal excellence, integrity, and accountability. 
Applicant testified that, in the ten years he has worked in the defense industry, he has 
never had a security violation.22 
 
 Three witnesses testified that Applicant is honest, trustworthy, and a person of 
integrity. As an example of Applicant’s integrity, two witnesses cited a large funding 
error that Applicant brought to his company’s attention even though he faced potential 
negative repercussions by revealing the error.23 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
20 Tr. 98-99; HE 1. See also ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015) 
 
21 Tr. 59, 70, 85-93; AE B, E, F, G, H. 
 
22 Tr. 62-63 102-103; AE C, D. 
 
23 Tr. 30-48. 
 
 
8 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
9 
 
 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them, and the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone could 
be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. In this case, Applicant’s father is a dual citizen 
of Iran and the United States. Applicant also has three aunts, an uncle, and a niece who 
are citizens and residents of Iran.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. Iran is an intelligence threat to the United 
States, supports terrorism, and has a poor human rights record. Such circumstances 
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion for Applicant’s family members in Iran and places a heavy burden of 
persuasion on him to demonstrate that his contacts in Iran do not pose a security risk 
and that he will not be placed in a position of having to choose between his loyalty to 
the U.S. and his family members. I find that AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
 
10 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
In about 1975, Applicant’s father left Iran for religious reasons. He has resided in 
the United States for the past 40 years, has worked for defense contractors for the past 
30 years, and has held a security clearance. Language differences limit Applicant’s 
ability to interact with his family members in Iran. He has not had any contact with his 
family members in Iran in the past eight years. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply.  
 
Applicant’s roots, financial interests, and close relationships are in the United 
States. He does not speak Farsi. His interests in Iran are minimal and are outweighed in 
comparison to his interests in the United States. Even though it is unlikely that Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of anyone in Iran 
and his U.S. interests, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to:  
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. He was issued an Iranian passport in 
2001, which was extended in 2006. In 2006 and 2007, Applicant used the Iranian 
passport to enter Iran. AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 sets forth conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willing to renounce dual citizenship; and 
 
(d) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant’s father obtained Applicant’s Iranian passport for him. No evidence was 
presented that Applicant sought to obtain that passport. Applicant has expressed a 
willingness to renounce his Iranian citizenship. His Iranian passport expired in 2011. He 
has surrendered the expired passport to his facility security officer. AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(b), 
and 11(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
When falsification allegations are controverted by an applicant, as in this case, 
the Government has the burden of proving them. An omission, standing alone, does not 
prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the entire record as a whole to 
 
12 
 
 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of omission.24 An applicant’s level of 
education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a SCA was deliberate.25 
 
Applicant did not falsify his 2005 SCA when he answered “No” to the question 
that asked whether he “ever had contact with a foreign government, its establishments 
(embassies or consulates), or its representatives, whether inside or outside the U.S., 
other than on official U.S. Government business.” Applicant’s father dealt with foreign 
officials to obtain and extend his Iranian passport. No evidence was presented that 
Applicant had contacts with such officials. I find in favor of Applicant on the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 3.i. 
 
When Applicant became aware of his Iranian citizenship and Iranian passport is 
unclear. As a teenager, he talked with his father about the possibility of being subjected 
to compulsory military service if he visited Iran, but claimed his did not associate that 
possibility with Iranian citizenship. It is possible that he was not aware of his Iranian 
citizenship and Iranian passport prior to his trips to Iran in 2006 and 2007. 
Consequently, I find in favor of Applicant on the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.g and 3.h that 
dealt with questions about his foreign citizenship and foreign passport on his 2005 SCA.  
 
Applicant did not falsify his 2010 SCA when he answered “No” to the question 
that asked whether he had close and continuing contacts with foreign nationals with 
whom he was bound by affection, influence, or obligation. His testimony that he did not 
consider his three aunts, uncle, or niece as close and continuing foreign contacts was 
believable and understandable. Additionally, he most likely did not consider his father as 
a foreign national for purposes of this question. I find in favor of Applicant on the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 3.d. 
 
However, Applicant deliberately omitted required information on his 2010 SCA 
when he failed to disclose his Iranian citizenship and his active Iranian passport. 
Applicant either provided a picture of himself for the extension of his Iranian passport in 
2006 or sat for that picture. He most likely would have known the purpose for that 
picture. In 2006 and 2007, he traveled to Iran at the age of 26 and 27. During those 
trips, he was either a graduate student or held master’s degrees and had been working 
for a defense contractor for two or three years. Although he claimed his parents held all 
the travel documents during those trips, he remembered seeing his U.S. passport and 
noted he did not like his picture in that passport. In answering the SOR, Applicant did 
not state that he had no knowledge of his Iranian passport when he completed his 2010 
SCA. Instead, he stated that he “did not reconcile or consider the Iranian passport” 
when completing that document. That statement implies that he was aware of the 
Iranian passport, but overlooked it. At the hearing and in his post-hearing submission, 
he claimed he learned of the Iranian passport after submission of the 2010 SCA. His 
                                                          
24 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov 17, 2004). 
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep 9, 2010). 
 
 
13 
 
 
claims that he was not aware of the Iranian passport during his trips to Iran are not 
believable. I conclude that he had knowledge of the Iranian passport in 2006 and 2007 
and, consequently, was aware of his Iranian citizenship at that time. He deliberately 
falsified his 2010 SCA when he failed to disclose his Iranian citizenship and Iranian 
passport. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶¶ 3.b, 3.c, and 3.e. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
In about 2013, Applicant disclosed to the Government the existence his Iranian 
passport and Iranian citizenship. At the hearing, however, he denied he falsified his 
responses to the foreign citizenship and foreign passport questions on his 2010 SCA. 
His denial of those falsification allegations undercuts application of AG ¶ 17(a). His 
2010 SCA falsifications are recent and significant. In falsifying his SCA, he seriously 
undermined the security clearance adjudication process. I find that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply to his deliberate falsifications.  
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, C, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a valued employee. He has a reputation for honesty and trustworthiness. 
He has held a security clearance for about ten years. Nevertheless, he deliberately 
failed to provide complete and accurate responses to questions on his 2010 SCA. 
Those falsifications raise serious security concerns that have not been mitigated.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence and foreign preference guidelines, but failed to mitigate the security concerns 
under the personal conduct guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
15 
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph 3.a:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 3.b-3.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.f:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 3.g-3.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                               
_____________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
