 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05984 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On June 8, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 24, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on October 19, 2015. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 4 through 
11 are admitted into evidence. Applicant did not provide additional evidence and the 
record closed. The case was assigned to me on December 28, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. I have incorporated his admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has not served in the 
military. He married in 1982 and divorced in 1991. He remarried in 1995. He has a 
grown child. He has worked for the same federal contractor since 1987.1 
 
 In 1984, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence 
(DUI) of alcohol. No other information was provided about this arrest. 
 
 In approximately November 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
domestic battery of his spouse. Applicant admitted alcohol was a factor in the incident. 
He pled guilty and was required to complete an anger management class, which he 
did.2  
 
 In approximately December 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
domestic battery of his spouse. Applicant admitted alcohol was a factor in the incident. 
He pled guilty and was required to complete an anger management class, which he did. 
He was also required to obtain an alcohol evaluation from a certified alcohol program 
and complete a 20-week partner abuse intervention program. He completed both. A 
letter from the alcohol counselor from September 2001 stated she met with Applicant 
“for a Chemical Dependency Evaluation update.” She indicated there had been no 
significant impairments in Applicant’s life since the previous evaluation and no further 
recommendation were made for any additional treatment.3 
 
 After the 2000 arrest, Applicant voluntarily attended an outpatient alcohol 
detoxification program from January 2001 to March 2001. He completed the program. 
Applicant admitted that he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent while at the program, 
but other evidence of that diagnosis is not contained in the FORM. He abstained from 
alcohol consumption from 2001 until approximately 2009 when he began to consume 
approximately one to two beers after work, regularly but not necessarily every day. He 
has had no alcohol-related incidents nor was any evidence presented that alcohol has 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
3 Items 5, 6, 7, 10 and 11. 
 
3 
 
 
had a negative impact on his personal or professional life since the December 2000 
domestic violence charge. During Applicant’s background interview with a government 
investigator he admitted that, before attending the detoxification program, he had a 
problem with alcohol and that he was a recovering alcoholic.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
4 Item 7. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.  
 
Applicant was charged with DUI in 1984. No information about the disposition of 
the charge was provided. Applicant was charged with domestic battery in 1998 and 
2000. He pled guilty to the charges. There is evidence to support that Applicant was 
evaluated by a staff member at an alcohol treatment program. The evidence provided 
by Applicant indicates he was a recovering alcoholic. The letter from the staff member 
at the alcohol treatment program does not clearly state that he was evaluated and 
determined to be alcohol dependent, rather the letter was an update for a chemical 
dependency evaluation. I find AG ¶ 22(a) applies. I find AG ¶ 22(e) marginally applies. 
There is no evidence that Applicant was told he must abstain from all alcohol use 
forever. AG ¶ 22(f) does not apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
5 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser”); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant admitted that before going through the detoxification program he had a 
problem with alcohol. He abstained from alcohol consumption from 2001 to 2009. Since 
then he consumes one to two beers after work, regularly, but not necessarily daily. 
There is no evidence of any alcohol-related incident since 2000, more than 15 years 
ago. There is no evidence he was advised that he must abstain from all alcohol 
consumption for the rest of his life. Applicant has been consuming alcohol since 2009 
without incident. It appears his difficulties with alcohol are in the past, and he has 
established a pattern of responsible use. I find a significant amount of time has passed 
since Applicant had a problem with alcohol and that future problems are unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. Applicant completed an alcohol program in 2001 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption. I find 
AG ¶ 23(d) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He has been married to his wife for almost 20 years. 
He has worked for the same employer since 1987. In 2001, he completed a 
detoxification program due to his problems with alcohol, which included two domestic 
battery convictions. He abstained from alcohol consumption from 2001 to 2009. He now 
drinks one to two beers after work, frequently, but not necessarily daily. Since he 
resumed consuming alcohol there is no evidence of personal or professional problems 
related to it. It appears he consumes alcohol responsibly. Applicant has met his burden 
of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
