 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-05328 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges and the record establishes: (1) 
she provided false information about her history of marijuana use on her August 31, 
2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1); and (2) she used marijuana four times from approximately 
April 2004 to July 2008. Her marijuana use is not recent and ceased before she 
received a security clearance. Drug involvement security concerns are mitigated; 
however, personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified 
information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On November 13, 2009, and August 31, 2013, Applicant completed and signed 
two SF 86s. (GE 1; GE 2) On March 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
                                         
 
or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 3) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under AGs E (personal conduct) and H (drug involvement).  
  
On April 9, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and she requested a hearing. 
On September 28, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 7, 
2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
setting the hearing for November 9, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 14; GE 1-4) Applicant did not offer any 
documents into evidence. (Tr. 10) On November 23, 2015, I received a transcript of the 
hearing.   
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she denied all of the SOR allegations, and she 
also provided some admissions as well as extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old operations specialist, who is seeking a security 
clearance to enhance her employment with a defense contractor. (Tr. 5) In 2004, she 
graduated from high school, and in 2008, she received a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 5-6) 
She majored in psychology and minored in criminal justice. (Tr. 6) In 2015, she was 
awarded a master’s degree in homeland security management. She requires three 
additional courses to complete her master’s degree in business administration. (Tr. 35) 
 
In 2006, Applicant joined a military service, and she is currently a petty officer 
first class (E-6). (Tr. 6) Her military specialty is operations specialist. (Tr. 7) She was 
accepted into officer’s candidate school beginning in January 2016. (Tr. 6, 23) She has 
never been married. (GE 1)   
 
Personal Conduct and Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant’s history of marijuana use is documented in her February 9, 2010 
enlistment documentation (DD Form 1966/3) and in her November 13, 2009 SF 86. (GE 
2; GE 4) Applicant denied any marijuana use in her August 31, 2013 SF 86, April 4, 
2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), SOR 
response, and at her hearing. (Tr. 16-36; GE 1; GE 3; SOR response)  
 
In her DD Form 1966/3 Applicant disclosed in response to question 26 that she 
had some involvement with illegal drugs. In Section VI, Remarks, she explained that 
she “[e]xperimented with marijuana 4 times between 2004-2008. Last time was July 
2008.” (GE 4) The DD Form 1966/3 includes the following certification statement: 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
                                         
 
I certify that the information given by me in this document is true, 
complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I 
understand that I am being accepted for enlistment based on the 
information provided by me in this document; that if any of the information 
is knowingly false or incorrect, I could be tried in a civilian or military court 
and could receive a less than honorable discharge which could affect my 
future employment opportunities. (GE 4) 
 
In Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, of Applicant’s November 13, 
2009 SF 86, she was asked whether in the last seven years she used marijuana. (Tr. 
16-19; GE 2) Applicant answered, “Yes,” and explained: 
 
Dates of use/activity  
      From (Month/Year):  04/2004 (Estimated)  
      To (Month/Year): 07/2008 (Estimated) 
 
Type of controlled substance(s) Marijuana 
 
Explain (nature of use/activity, frequency of activity and number of times used) 
Experimental, very infrequent use, 4 times used in 4 years (GE 2; 
emphasis in original) 
 
In Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, of Applicant’s August 31, 
2013 SF 86, she was asked whether in the last seven years she used marijuana. (GE 1) 
Applicant answered, “No.” (Tr. 29; GE 1) 
 
On April 4, 2014, an OPM investigator confronted Applicant with her prior 
admissions of marijuana use on her enlistment documentation and on her November 
13, 2009 SF 86.2 Applicant told the OPM investigator that she had no idea how the 
information about her marijuana use came to be on her enlistment documentation and 
on her November 13, 2009 SF 86. She said she had never used marijuana. She denied 
that she was ever in the presence of illegal drug use, and she did not associate with 
anyone that used illegal drugs. There is no mention of her recruiter in her OPM PSI. 
 
At her hearing, Applicant said that she filled out her November 13, 2009 SF 86 
and her February 9, 2010 DD Form 1966/3 at her military recruiter’s office with the help 
of her recruiter. (Tr. 18-19, 26-28; GE 2; GE 4) She claimed that she told her recruiter 
that she did not use illegal drugs; however, others used drugs in her vicinity. (Tr. 19-22, 
31) He said it would be best to disclose the drug use; he checked yes; and he filled out 
her SF 86 for her. (Tr. 20, 24, 30-31) She conceded that it did not make sense for her 
recruiter to tell her to falsely admit to marijuana use when she did not use marijuana. 
(Tr. 24) She thought the comment about “experimenting” with marijuana resulted from a 
miscommunication with her recruiter. (Tr. 24) She denied that she reviewed the 
comment about experimental marijuana use before signing her SF 86 and before 
                                            
2The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s April 4, 2014 Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (GE 3)  
 
4 
                                         
 
signing her DD Form 1966/3. (Tr. 25, 28-29) Applicant denied that she used marijuana, 
and she denied that she intentionally provided false information about her marijuana 
use on her November 13, 2009 SF 86. (Tr. 31-32, 35-36; SOR response)  
 
I accept Applicant’s statements that she does not associate with drug-using 
associates and contacts, and she does not go to environments where drugs are used. 
(GE 3) However, she did not provide a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant started a sorority at her college. (Tr. 33) She spent thousands of hours 
volunteering for numerous charitable organizations. (Tr. 34-35) From 2005 until 2014, 
she worked in retail and in a military service, where she was subject to random 
urinalysis testing to detect illegal drug use. (Tr. 34) There is no evidence of positive 
urinalysis test results indicating illegal drug use.  
   
Policies 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
This decision is not based, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
 
5 
                                         
 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. Thus, any decision to deny a security 
clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse;”3 and “(c) illegal drug possession.” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply because 
Applicant used marijuana four times from April 2004 to July 2008.4 She possessed 
                                            
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances.  
 
6 
                                         
 
marijuana before she used it. Consideration of mitigating conditions is required. The 
Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability 
of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
                                                                                                                                            
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are 
contained in 21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. 
See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement 
of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7 
                                         
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s most recent marijuana use occurring approximately 
17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period 
of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
Applicant recognized the adverse impact that drug use will have on her career. 
She is on active duty in the military, and is seeking employment by a DOD contractor. 
Illegal drug use is incompatible with her attendance at officer’s candidate school. There 
is no evidence of marijuana use after July 2008. She intends to continue to abstain from 
drug possession and use. AG ¶ 26(a) applies to her illegal-drug-related conduct 
because it is not recent. Her marijuana use “happened under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur.” Her marijuana use ended in July 2008 and “does not cast doubt on 
[her] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”5  
AG ¶ 26(b) applies. Applicant has disassociated from her drug-using associates 
and contacts, and she does not go to environments where drugs are used. However, 
she did not provide “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation.”  
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. She did not provide 
proof of satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.    
 
In conclusion, Applicant possessed and used marijuana four times from April 
2004 to July 2008. After completing college, she joined a military service that prohibits 
members from using illegal drugs, and she complied with her service’s restrictions 
against illegal drug use. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. She 
understands the adverse consequences from illegal drugs.6 She has demonstrated a 
sufficient track record of no drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to her 
access to classified information.  
 
                                            
5In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse.  
 
6Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
8 
                                         
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsification of Applicant’s August 31, 2013 SF 
86 used to process the adjudication of her security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.7 
 
In Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, of Applicant’s August 31, 
2013 SF 86, she was asked whether in the last seven years she used marijuana. 
Applicant answered, “No.” She knew that she used marijuana about two or three times 
from August 2006 to July 2008. AG ¶ 16(a) is established.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
                                            
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                         
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant deliberately and improperly denied that she used marijuana in the 
previous seven years on her August 31, 2013 SF 86, when in fact she knew that she 
used marijuana about two or three times from August 2006 to July 2008. She 
maintained her denial of marijuana use in her OPM PSI, SOR response and at her 
hearing. I accept Applicant’s history of marijuana use as documented in her February 9, 
2010 DD Form 1966/3 and in her November 13, 2009 SF 86 as more credible than 
Applicant’s OPM PSI, SOR response, and statement at her hearing. Applicant’s 
recruiter had no known reason to fabricate the content of her February 9, 2010 DD 
Form 1966/3 and in her November 13, 2009 SF 86 document, and they were written 
closer in time or more contemporaneous to Applicant’s marijuana use than Applicant’s 
statements in her August 31, 2013 SF 86, OPM PSI, SOR response, and at her hearing. 
    
 In sum, Applicant’s falsification of her August 31, 2013 security clearance 
application by intentionally denying any marijuana use in the previous seven years 
raised a security concern. She did not admit her conduct and take responsibility for her 
poor decision despite being given multiple opportunities to do so. Instead she attempted 
to blame her false statement on her recruiter. No mitigating conditions apply. Guideline 
E concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
                                         
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has achieved important employment goals, demonstrating some self-
discipline, responsibility, and dedication; however, this evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate security concerns. Applicant is a 29-year-old operations specialist seeking a 
security clearance to enhance her employment with a defense contractor. (Tr. 5) In 
2008, she received a bachelor’s degree with a major in psychology and minor in 
criminal justice. In 2015, she was awarded a master’s degree in homeland security 
management. She requires three additional courses to complete her master’s degree in 
business administration. In 2006, she joined a military service; she is currently a petty 
officer first class; and she was accepted into officer’s candidate school beginning in 
January 2016. Applicant started a sorority at her college. She spent thousands of hours 
volunteering for numerous charitable organizations. She ended her marijuana use in 
2008 before being given access to classified information. 
 
The adverse information is more significant. Applicant’s falsification of her August 
31, 2013 security clearance application by intentionally denying any marijuana use in 
the previous seven years raised a serious security concern. She did not admit her 
conduct and take responsibility for her poor decision to lie about her history of marijuana 
use on her 2013 security clearance application despite being given multiple 
opportunities to do so. Instead she attempted to blame her false statement on her 
recruiter. The protection of national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct 
that jeopardizes security, even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s 
career. Applicant cannot be trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information, and 
her reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information is not 
established. 
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Drug involvement security concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct 
security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
  
 
11 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
