 Exhibit 5 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-06915
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. She has a history of financial problems or
difficulties, which is due to a job layoff in 2009 and a subsequent two-year period of
unemployment that ended in October 2011. Although she did not present a perfect case
in mitigation, she presented sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the security
concern stemming from her problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is
decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on July 15, 2014.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Exhibits 6 and 7. 6
2
(DOD),  on June 1, 2015, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for
financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR in a July 13, 2015 response
consisting of a one-page memorandum. 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case
will be decided on the written record.  On September 8, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This5
so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on
September 21, 2015. Applicant replied in a timely manner and submitted a one-page
memorandum along with three letters of confirmation of payment for the delinquent debt
in SOR ¶ 1.c, which are collectively admitted without objections as Exhibit A. The case
was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.    
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 65-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security
clearance. She has been employed as a receptionist for a federal contractor since
October 2011. Before that, she was unemployed for two years. Before that, she was
employed as a receptionist for a federal contractor from 1994 until a layoff in October
2009. She held a security clearance during that period of employment. During her
2009–2011 unemployment, she supported herself with unemployment compensation
and her savings, but nonetheless fell behind on her financial obligations. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which she does not dispute. In
addition to her admissions to the SOR allegations, her problematic financial history is
documented and established by credit reports from 2015 and 2014.  6
 Exhibit 6 at 2–3. 7
 Exhibit 6 at 2; Exhibit 7 at 7.8
 Exhibit A. 9
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to10
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
3
The SOR allegations consist of nine delinquent debts for a total of $11,776
consisting of an unpaid judgment for $1,047 and eight collection or charged-off
accounts. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted seven of the nine delinquent debts
and asserted that two debts were duplicates. She also explained the following: (1) she
has been a longtime single mother of two children without the benefit of child support,
which resulted in her being solely responsible for her children’s expenses, to include
student loans; (2) her financial struggles were attributable to the 2009–2011 period of
unemployment; (3) she moved in with her mother to reduce her living expenses but
ended up taking on expenses while living there; and (4) she was unable to make
payment arrangements until September 2015, and then intended to resolve the debts
starting with the smallest debt first.
Her claim that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are the same debt is supported
by the evidence. The 2015 credit report shows this was a single debt reported twice,
first as a $1,797 charged-off account by the original creditor, and then as a $2,561
collection account with the successor-in-interest creditor.    7
Her claim that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i are the same debt is not
supported by the evidence. The credit reports show they are separate accounts with
separate account numbers with unrelated creditors.   8
In her reply to the FORM, Applicant provided a series of letters from
August–September 2015 showing that she has made monthly payments on the $786
collection account in SOR ¶ 1.c, reducing the balance to about $244 as of September
29, 2015.  The collection account stems from a student loan cosigned by Applicant for9
her son, which had a balance as high as about $3,000 at one point. She also explained
that her finances did not allow her to make other repayment arrangements until the
student loan debt was resolved. She did not submit documentation for the remaining
seven delinquent debts, which are found to be unresolved. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As10
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
 484 U.S. at 531.11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 18
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).19
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.20
4
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt11
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An12
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  13
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting14
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An15
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate16
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme17
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it20
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 21
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant22
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  23
 AG ¶ 19(a).  24
 AG ¶ 19(c). 25
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).26
5
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant21
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 22
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  23
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion of inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts24
and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F.25
Excluding the $1,797 collection account in SOR ¶ 1.d due to duplication, and presuming
the small balance of $244 for the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.c has now been paid,
Applicant is facing about $9,200 in delinquent debt for the remaining seven SOR
allegations. 
 In mitigation, I have considered six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and26
I have especially considered the following as most pertinent:
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 27
6
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) . . .  there are clear indications that problem is being resolved
or is under control; and 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Applicant’s problematic financial history is due to her two-year period of
unemployment during 2009–2011, a circumstance largely beyond her control because
she lost her job due to a layoff from a longtime employer. She acted responsibly under
the circumstances by eventually finding her current job at an age when many people
would think about collecting Social Security benefits in lieu of full-time employment. She
also moved in with her mother to reduce living expenses. Those are not the actions of
an irresponsible person. 
In addition, there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problem is being
resolved based on her initiation of a good-faith effort to repay her delinquent debts. She
largely resolved the $728 collection account in SOR ¶ 1.c, which stemmed from a
student loan she cosigned for a son, a debt which I consider to be a high priority. And
she has a plan to resolve the other seven delinquent debts by payment of one debt at a
time starting with the smallest debt first, which is a reasonable approach that will take
time to complete. 
Of course, the purpose of this case is not aimed at collecting debts.  Rather, the27
purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, the
Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 28
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).29
7
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.28
Here, the evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the concern. The remaining
seven delinquent debts total about $9,200, which is not a large, overwhelming amount
of money beyond her ability to repay given her full-time employment. Looking forward, it
is reasonable to conclude that she should be able to repay those debts, one debt at a
time starting with the smallest debt first. Applicant is a mature woman with a long record
of employment working in the defense industry, and she has earned an opportunity to
show she can execute the balance of her repayment plan. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties does not create doubt
about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I29
conclude that she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
