 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03466 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On March 16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred her case to 
an administrative judge for a determination whether her clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant answered the SOR on May 1, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 29, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated 
September 30, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 12, 2015. She was 
afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information after receipt of the FORM, 
which was received without objection from Department Counsel.1 On November 12, 
2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Her SOR answers 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old plant manager employed by a defense contractor since 
November 2007. She was previously employed by the same defense contractor from 
February 2003 to August 2006. She seeks to renew her security clearance as a 
condition of continued employment. (Item 3, Item 7) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in approximately 1992. She was awarded 
an associate’s degree in 2007, and attended several colleges after receiving her 
associate’s degree. (Item 3, Item 7) Applicant was married from 2002 to 2008, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. She has two children ages, 24 and 14. Applicant did not 
serve in the armed forces. (Item 3, Item 7) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges ten debt allegations totaling $30,885. After Applicant 
received her copy of the FORM, she submitted additional information in her FORM 
response that clarified her financial situation. The following summarizes her SOR debts 
and their known status. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a - Judgment filed against Applicant in 2011 for $8,151. Applicant is 
making payments on this account. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (Item 2; FORM 
response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Collection account for $1,052. Applicant paid debt in full. DEBT 
RESOLVED. (Item 2; FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e – Collection accounts for $5,972 and $4,946. Both accounts 
are from the same creditor. Applicant denied that the first account is hers and provided 
documentation that she settled and paid an account with the creditor for $9,734. Debts 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as “FORM response.” 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
appear to be duplicates or were consolidated. DEBTS RESOLVED. (Item 2; FORM 
response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Collection account for $432. Applicant paid debt in full. DEBT 
RESOLVED. (Item 2, SOR response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Charged-off credit card account for $8,201. Applicant paid debt in 
full. DEBT RESOLVED. (Item 2; SOR response) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.j – Collection accounts for $957, $448, $448, and $278. 
Applicant denied these were her accounts and opined they most likely are her former 
husband’s accounts. These debts do not appear on her two credit reports dated April 9, 
2014 and July 24, 2014. DEBTS RESOLVED. (Item 2, Item 5, Item 6, Item 7) 
 
Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to being laid off from July 2006 to 
November 2007, being a single mother, and having received “little to no child support” 
from her former husband after her 2008 divorce. She stated that she put her two 
children first, and with her limited income, fell behind on her bills. (Item 7) Applicant has 
been receiving employee-sponsored credit counseling for the past three years. This has 
helped her set up a manageable budget and return to financial responsibility. (Item 2)  
 
In addition to financial counseling, Applicant’s financial situation has improved as 
a result of receiving two promotions. Also, she no longer has to pay for her oldest child’s 
school tuition since he began college. (Item 7) She advised that she is doing much 
better financially and has set a goal of paying off all of her debts and improving her 
credit score. (Item 7) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt 
is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b) as a result of being laid off 
from 2006 to 2007 and for the fallout after her 2008 divorce. She would have received 
full credit had those events been more recent. Applicant receives full credit under AG ¶ 
20(c) for participating in financial counseling for the past three years and returning to 
financial responsibility. As noted, Applicant has either paid her known creditors or is in 
the process of repaying them. AG ¶ 20(d) is fully applicable. Given Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
resources, she is approaching her debts in a responsible and measured way.2 AG ¶ 
20(e) is applicable to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, and 1.g – 1.j.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Both the mitigating condition under Guidelines and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor and 
having previously held a security clearance weigh in her favor. She is a law-abiding 
citizen and a productive member of society. She is current on her day-to-day expenses, 
lives within her means, and her SOR debts are resolved or are being resolved. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
her debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will resolve the remaining debt on 
her SOR and maintain her financial responsibility.3    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:  FOR APPLICANT  
 
                                                          
3
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise 
made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and 
may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is 
conditional. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
