 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-04797 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On March 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 20, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 1, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 8, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, called four witnesses, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through AE Q, which were received into evidence without objection. 
On July 17, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Applicant’s 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old mechanical engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2005. He seeks to retain his security clearance as a 
requirement of his continued employment. Applicant has held a security clearance 
since 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 34-37, 43, 45, 52)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in spring 2000. He was awarded a 
bachelor of science degree in mechanical engineering in December 2004, and a 
master’s degree in business administration in May 2008. (Tr. 36-37; GE 1, GE 2; AE 
B, AE C, AE H, AE I) He married in April 2010, and does not have any children. His 
wife is employed full time as a certified public accountant (CPA) tax account manager.  
Applicant has not served in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; AE B, AE C; Tr. 37, 55, 58) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his initial SF-86 in January 2006, he denied having 
used illegal drugs to include marijuana, which was not accurate. He was subsequently 
granted a security clearance. At the time he completed his 2006 SF-86, he was 25 
years old. He was “worried about having used marijuana in the past” and that his past 
use “would automatically disqualify [him] from being able to obtain a security 
clearance.” (SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.b; SOR answer; Tr. 35, 44-46) Throughout this process, 
Applicant acknowledged that his January 2006 behavior was wrong. (Tr. 40, 44) 
 
The basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement and personal conduct concerns 
are derived from his self-disclosure during his periodic renewal for a security 
clearance in 2014. When Applicant completed his second SF-86 in April 2014, he was 
32 years old, married, and established in his career. (GE 1, GE 2) Applicant stated, “I 
was not provided any guidance with regards to filling out my [SF-86]. Additionally, 
when filling out my application for my [security] clearance, I voluntarily disclosed my 
 
3 
 
 
drug use on my [SF-86] and to the investigator in order to correct my previous 
mistake.” (SOR answer) Applicant testified, “I wanted to correct a wrong that I had 
made in 2006 and put everything out on the table.” (Tr. 36) He added, “I would never 
do anything to hurt my country. I have my family here. My life is here.” (Tr. 38, 51-52) 
 
Applicant described his past drug use as “sporadic” or “extremely infrequent 
and it occurred on less than ten occasions” during the time of 1998 to 2013. Applicant 
further admitted to using marijuana “sporadically” on a “few occasions” after he was 
granted a security clearance in May 2006. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b; SOR answer; Tr. 35, 40, 
45-46)  
 
In October 2013, Applicant recognized that he was putting himself and his 
career in jeopardy and made the decision that he would no longer use marijuana. 
From that point forward, he disassociated himself from individuals who smoked 
marijuana. Applicant realizes his behavior was reckless and expressed sincere regret 
for his behavior. (SOR answer; Tr. 41) Applicant’s wife was not involved in any of his 
drug activity and was very upset with him for putting their family’s future in jeopardy. 
(Tr. 49, 52-53) 
 
 Applicant submitted a substance abuse evaluation completed in February 2015 
by a licensed mental health therapist and certified addiction specialist. The specialist 
stated that Applicant’s past motivation to use marijuana was to “fit in,” adding that 
Applicant ceased marijuana use since October 2013. The specialist concluded by 
stating that Applicant does not have an addiction issue that needs to be resolved. (Tr. 
38-39, 48-49; AE D) 
 
 Applicant also submitted a notarized statement of intent to never use illegal 
drugs again with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. (Tr. 39; AE E) He 
also submitted five negative random drug tests collected on February 17, 2015, 
February 23, 2015, February 27, 2015, June 19, 2015, and June 22, 2015. (Tr. 39, 41; 
AE G, AE Q)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 In addition to testifying on his own behalf, Applicant called four witnesses: (1) 
the vice-president and director of operations for a commercial real estate company 
and long-time family friend (RE); (2) a retired elementary school principal and a long-
time family friend (SP); a senior manager and mentor from his employer (SM); and (4) 
Applicant’s wife of five years employed as a CPA tax account manager (W).  
 
RE testified that she never saw Applicant manifest behavior during the time she 
has known him to suggest that he was abusing or using drugs, that he was very 
honest, and had matured over the years since she has known him. (Tr. 19-24) SP 
testified that she has never seen Applicant exhibit behavior indicative of drug use and 
that he is very honest. (Tr. 25-29)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SM testified that he has held a security clearance for 30 years, is familiar with 
security clearance requirements, and knows Applicant as an employee and mentor.  
SM has no reservations about recommending Applicant for a security clearance 
knowing about his past marijuana use and failure to disclose past marijuana use on 
his 2006 SF-86. SM stated that Applicant was young at the time he completed his SF-
86, that he has matured a tremendous amount over the past six years, and that he 
“stepp[ed] up” to correct his mistakes. SM further testified that Applicant is very 
reliable and “is the kind of guy that you put in charge of things and he . . . gets them 
done.”  (Tr. 29-34)  
 
W testified that Applicant informed her about his 2006 SF-86 omission when he 
filled out his second SF-86 in 2014. She described her response to that revelation as 
“pretty livid” and she was “very upset.” Applicant does not use marijuana today and 
she made him promise he was done with marijuana. If he violated that promise, she 
would “have to consider . . . a separation or divorce. [Violating a promise is] very 
serious to me.” W corroborated Applicant’s testimony that he no longer associates 
with individuals who use marijuana. (Tr. 54-60) 
 
Applicant submitted ten reference letters from a range of individuals to include 
senior company managers, co-workers, and long-time friends. The collective sense of 
these letters conveys that Applicant is an individual who has significantly matured, is 
reliable, is trustworthy, a family man, and is an overall “standup guy.” All reference 
letters strongly endorse continuation of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE A)  
 
Applicant submitted work performance reviews for the years 2006 to 2014. 
These reviews document above average performance and clearly show that Applicant 
is an employee who is making a significant contribution to his company and the 
national defense. (AE J – AE P) He is also the recipient of 16 company awards from 
2007 to 2013. (AE J) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
 
5 
 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through the evidence 
presented. He fully disclosed the circumstances surrounding his marijuana use in his 
SOR response, in his OPM PSI, and during his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of three drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 AG ¶ 
25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia;” and AG ¶ 25(g) 
“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
                                                          
1
 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
2
 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in October 2013, 
approximately 21 months before his hearing. His drug use ended at that time when he 
realized that drug use was incompatible for someone in his position and was 
specifically prohibited while holding a security clearance. The absence of evidence of 
more recent or extensive drug use and his promise not to use illegal drugs in the 
future eliminate doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment 
with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He disassociated from drug-using associates and submitted 
a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant has abstained from drug use for about 21 months and has had no difficulties 
in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
Applicant’s work performance evaluations show his work behavior has not been 
indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a valuable employee, who is 
reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the defense industry is supported 
by senior company officials, who know him personally and professionally, by his 
witnesses, and by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged that drug abuse is incompatible with his future career. He 
expressed a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with total 
abstinence of marijuana or any other illegal drugs.  
                                                                                                                                                                                       
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
3
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Personal Conduct  
       
AG ¶ 15 articulate the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use, discussed above, was cross-alleged under this 
concern. No new or additional facts pertaining to his drug involvement were developed 
during the hearing. (SOR ¶ 2.a) Accordingly, the facts and analysis under drug 
involvement are incorporated under this concern. With regard to the remaining 
personal conduct allegation, the evidence supports application of AG ¶ 16(a) as a 
result of Applicant’s failure to disclose his marijuana use when he completed his 2006 
SF-86. (SOR ¶ 2.b) 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
9 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
It was particularly helpful to hear Applicant’s testimony and the testimony of his 
witnesses, as well as reviewing the evidence he offered. This case came to light as a 
result of Applicant’s self-reporting. Applicant came forward during his 2014 security 
clearance reapplication and disclosed his past marijuana use as well as his failure to 
report his past marijuana use on his 2006 SF-86. Throughout the process, Applicant 
showed considerable maturity and expressed remorse. He has completed a favorable 
drug and alcohol assessment, favorably completed five random urinalysis tests, and 
informed his employer of his SOR allegations. Applicant has disassociated himself 
from those individuals with whom he used marijuana and signed a statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of security clearance for any drug violation. Applicant enjoys 
the support of his wife, work associates, and friends. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 
17(g) are applicable.4 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
                                                          
4
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)).  
 
10 
 
 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guidelines H and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employment history to date is indicative of stability and a 
strong work ethic. This support and self-introspection should ensure his continued 
success. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to remaining 
drug-free. Considering his demeanor, testimony, and evidence presented, I believe 
Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to 
recur. I find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
In sum, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”5 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 
  
 
                                                          
5
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.b:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
