KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: When evaluating the deliberate nature of an applicant’s omissions or false statements,
a Judge should consider the applicant’s mens rea in light of the entirety of the record. The Board
believes that Notice requirements are an essential component of the due process provided by the
Directive. It is possible that a Judge might have found that Applicant was forthright in his claim
that he did not know about the lien when he prepared the EQUIP.  However, it is not likely that a
Judge would have found the underlying tax lien mitigated. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05489.a1
DATE: 01/11/2016
DATE: January 11, 2016
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05489
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
2
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 2, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On October 29, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
he had deliberately falsified his security clearance application (SCA) and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is seeking a clearance in connection with his job with a Defense contractor.
Married with four children, he has a master’s degree.  He served in the military as a commissioned
officer from 1965 to 1985.  He held a clearance during this time. 
Applicant owed Federal income taxes for 2008 and 2009, due to lack of withholding from
his income.  He discovered this when he prepared his 2009 tax return.  However, by that time the
Government had scaled back its contracting activity, so Applicant did not have enough funds to
make the required payments.  He states that he had filed an Offer in Compromise with the IRS in
2011 but that he has not been able to make progress.  He also advises that he has not filed his 2013
and 2014 income tax returns due to his ongoing effort to resolve his earlier delinquencies.  Applicant
submitted a document (Account Quick Report) that appears to be a ledger from his employer
showing that he has been making payments of $1,000 a month to the IRS since April 2014.  There
is a conflict in the evidence as to whether these are voluntary payments or whether they are a
condition required by the Offer in Compromise.  The IRS filed a tax lien against Applicant in 2011.
The amount of the lien was $159,000, although Applicant disputes this amount.  Although Applicant
is willing to settle the debt, the IRS has not yet accepted the terms of his Offer.
  When completing his SCA, Applicant answered “no” to two questions.  One inquired as
to whether he had failed to pay Federal or state taxes within the previous seven years.  Another
asked if any liens had been filed against him for failure to pay tax.  For reasons set forth above, these
answers were false.  Applicant claimed that he did not know about the lien.  However, he knew he
owed taxes to the Government, as evidenced by his Offer in Compromise.
The Judge’s Analysis
3
The Judge stated that there is nothing in the record to show that the payments referenced in
Applicant’s Account Quick Report had been received.  She stated that Applicant’s having simply
waited for the IRS to respond after a number of delays over several years is not sufficient to show
a good-faith effort to resolve his tax debt.  She concluded that there is insufficient documentary
evidence to establish mitigation of the Guideline F concern.  Applicant “has not shown that he is or
has been reasonably, responsibly or prudently addressing his financial situation.”  Decision at 6.
Regarding Guideline E, the Judge stated that it was possible that Applicant was not aware of the
lien.  However, she concluded that it was not reasonable to believe that he was unaware that he owed
the taxes.  Among other things, she noted that he held a clearance during the 20 years he was in the
military and, therefore, had significant experience in completing SCAs.  She also noted his level of
education and that the question at issue is “clear and simple.”  Decision at 7.  She concluded that
Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  
1There is a problem with the scope of the SOR compared to scope of the FORM and the Judge’s decision.
Under Guideline F, the SOR only addresses one debt, the lien for 2011 taxes in the amount of $159,000.  Under
Guideline E, the SOR is worded ambiguously such that it might be read to address the entirety of Applicant’s e-QIP
answers under Section 26 - Financial Record...Taxes or it could, just as easily, be read to address only his negative
answer regarding a Tax lien.  On the one hand, there is a general approach to construe ambiguities against the drafter
(here, the Government).  On the other hand, the Board has frequently held that SORs are not held to the same standards
as criminal indictments.  Under both Guidelines, the FORM and the Judge’s decision address a range of tax and
disclosure issues beyond the 2011 lien.  
The Board believes that Notice requirements are an essential component of the due process provided by the
Directive and is reluctant to categorize a failure to provide fair and adequate notice as harmless.  In this case, it is
possible that a Judge might well have found that Applicant was forthright in his claim that he did not know about the
lien on the date he prepared the EQUIP.  However, it is not likely that a Judge would have found the underlying tax lien
mitigated.  Therefore, we decline to remand the case.
4
Discussion
   
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that his omissions from the SCA were false.1  When
evaluating the deliberate nature of an applicant’s omissions or false statements, a Judge should
consider the applicant’s mens rea in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-04226 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).  In the case before us, the record supports the
Judge’s finding.  For example, in his response to the SOR Applicant acknowledged that as of 2009
he was aware that he owed back taxes.  This admission, viewed in light of the Judge’s findings about
Applicant’s level of education and the clarity of the question at issue are sufficient to constitute
substantial evidence of a deliberate omission in his 2012 SCA.  Applicant’s appeal brief, to a large
extent, repeats assertions that were contained in his reply to the File of Relevant Material.  Applicant
has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Applicant challenges the Judge’s
application of the whole-person factors.  We conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis
complies with the requirements of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a), in that the Judge considered the
totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching her decision. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02806 at 4
(App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
