 
 
 
 
1 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ADP Case No. 14-02676 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) regarding her eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
timely responded to the SOR, admitting the sole allegation raised, which concerned her 
having filed for bankruptcy in 2014. She also requested a determination based on the 
written record.  
 
On July 23, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
with seven attachments. Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days 
provided. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. Based on my review of 
 
 
 
 
2 
the file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.    
 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old female who has worked for the same defense 
contractor since September 2013. She was unemployed from June 2012 until August 
2013. Before that, she worked as an office receptionist for nearly two decades, until her 
facility closed. She attended college, but did not receive a diploma or degree. In her 
August 2013 security clearance application (SCA), she noted that she had been married 
since the late 1980s and she was not separated from her spouse. More recent evidence 
suggests she recently filed for divorce. She has one adult child.  
 
At issue in the SOR is an April 2014 Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing concerning 
about $296,831 in liabilities. As of the March 2015 SOR issuance date, the bankruptcy 
was still active. Applicant initially attributed her need for bankruptcy, in part, to her 
recent period of unemployment. In her response to the 2015 SOR, she wrote that she 
“filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy due to divorce proceedings.” (FORM, Item 1, Response 
to the SOR)  
 
The only other references to financial issues come from Applicant’s responses to 
interrogatories and interviews in 2013. FORM, Item 3. During an interview, she admitted 
to having defaulted on a loan, been subject to a repossession, and having had an 
account or credit card suspended or charged off for failure to pay. She did not 
previously disclose these facts because she was unaware she needed to document 
them. At the time, Applicant was able to meet her obligations, except for her house 
payment, which was then close to two months late.  She had hoped to use her new job 
to generate funds to pay off her debts. She wrote that she had contacted multiple 
creditors concerning her finances, but provided no documentary evidence showing such 
calls or contacts were made. No documented evidence was introduced providing a 
direct nexus between the debts at issue in the 2014 bankruptcy and those acquired 
during her period of unemployment, between 2012 and 2013, or her divorce 
proceedings, presumably somewhere between 2014 and 2015.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a position of trust, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
 
 
 
 
3 
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.”  
 
A person who seeks a public trust position enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides 
that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth the applicable trustworthiness concern: 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy with liabilities listed for approximately $296,831. No evidence 
was offered as to any progress on her petition, and no comments have been offered 
toward its current status. Such facts raise financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these financial concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Multiple delinquent debts remain unpaid. Applicant attributes many, if not all, of 
her debts to a year of unemployment between 2012 and 2013, and to recent divorce 
proceedings, which were apparently commenced on some undisclosed date between 
2014 and 2015. Little is known of these circumstances, but it can be assumed such 
conditions did lead to some degree of financial hardship. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) could 
apply as to the acquisition of her delinquent debts. However, no documentary evidence 
was introduced showing she acted responsibly at the time. Moreover, no mitigating 
conditions apply with regard to any efforts she may have exerted to address these debts 
since that time. Furthermore, there is no evidence she has received formal financial 
counseling that has helped her address her debts. Given the scant information 
introduced by Applicant, none of the available mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  
       
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old female who has worked for the same defense 
contractor since September 2013. She assumed this position after experiencing a 
 
 
 
 
5 
period of unemployment lasting from June 2012 until August 2013. Before that, she 
worked as an office receptionist for nearly 20 years. She completed some college. Quite 
recently, she filed for divorce. She has a grown child.  
 
In this case, Applicant requested a decision based on the written record. That 
record is scant. As noted in the analysis above, Applicant first attributed her 2014 
bankruptcy petition, in part, to her 2012-2013 period of unemployment. Recently, in 
2015, she blamed her need for bankruptcy protection on a divorce. No documentary 
evidence was specifically offered linking any of her debts to either event. Similarly, no 
documentary evidence was offered reflecting her efforts to work with creditors, settle her 
debts, work out a debt repayment plan, seek financial counseling, or otherwise address 
her debts. No documentary evidence was offered to show the current status of her 
bankruptcy petition. Her documentary evidence does not give rise to any of the 
available financial considerations mitigating conditions. 
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, expect that an applicant articulate a workable plan to address their delinquent 
debts, show that their plan has been successfully implemented, and document that their 
financial outlook has improved. Here, Applicant provided insufficient documentary 
evidence to establish that progress is being made on her delinquent debts and her 
bankruptcy petition. Lacking such proof, the financial considerations concerns remain.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a    Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to permit Applicant to maintain a 
public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
