1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
         )       ISCR Case No. 14-05210
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Meg Foreman,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 8, 2015. A notice of hearing
was issued on June 23, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2015.  At
Applicant’s request, the case was postponed for good cause. The hearing was
rescheduled for November 13, 2015. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, and did not submit exhibits at the hearing.
The transcript was received on November 24, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
2
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F. She provided explanations for each alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 46 years old. She graduated from high school and attended college
from 2006 to 2009, obtaining an associate’s degree. She also obtained a certificate from
a dental school. Applicant is single and has no children. She served in the United States
Navy from 1993 until 2001. She was recalled in 2001, and she served on active duty
from November 2001 to June 2002, receiving an honorable discharge. She retired from
the U.S. Navy Reserves in 2014.  She has been with her current employer since 2004,
where she serves as a security specialist. She completed a security clearance
application in 2013. (GX 1) Applicant has held a security clearance, but it is not clear for
what period of time.
The SOR alleges approximately $67,000 in delinquent debt on one mortgage
loan, and the other mortgage account is delinquent in the amount of $70,300. (GX 2 and
3)
Applicant purchased two home properties in 2007. She paid about $70,000 for
one property and $95,000 for the second property. She planned to live in one home
when she found a job in that area. Applicant allowed her cousins to live in one home
while she was working in another state.  Her mother lived in the other property. (Tr. 15)
When Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan in 2009, her mother had the legal authority
to make the mortgage payments and access Applicant’s bank account. Upon return to
the states in late 2010, Applicant learned that mortgage payments had been missed.
(Tr. 30) She also states the amount of the monthly payment increased. Applicant made
payments until 2011. (Tr. 41)
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant stated that the property went to foreclosure in
2011. She made inquiries over the years about the status of the home. Applicant
claimed that payments were made consistently from 2007 until 2009, when she was
deployed. She submitted her bank statements which show a monthly payment of about
$650. (Attachments to SOR) She contacted the bank in 2015 to see if she could receive
help from any national programs. She is awaiting an answer. (Tr. 46) Applicant’s mother
died in 2014 and the residence is empty. 
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant stated that the property was taken by the
bank. She claims she has not received any documentation as to a sale and if she owes
a deficiency debt. (Tr. 47) She learned in 2011 that the bank had returned several
payments to her mother but could not explain what happened for this to occur.  She will
be responsible for the deficiency amount. 
Applicant emphasized that the debts are not the result of an inability to live within
her means or poor self-control. She claims that it was poor judgment to leave the
properties in her mother’s care while Applicant was deployed. She acknowledged that
she did not monitor the accounts when she was deployed. She did not have automatic
payments because her mother was paying for the one property and her cousins were
3
paying the for the other property. (Tr.33) She stated that she tried to continue to make
payments after she returned home from deployment and tried to avoid foreclosure. She
believes that between the two properties she paid $15,000, but to no avail. (Answer to
SOR)
Applicant points to the fact that she is in good standing with other financial
institutions, such as a credit union and another bank since approximately 1993. (Tr. 19)
She has no credit card delinquencies and has had several car notes that have been
paid. She has spoken to a bankruptcy attorney to discuss possible bankruptcy
proceedings, but has not pursued financial counseling. At the hearing, she was no
longer certain that she would proceed with a bankruptcy. (Tr. 22)
 
Applicant could not explain what actually occurred in her absence with the
monthly mortgage payments for the two properties. She emphasized that her mother
was in charge of making the payments and that her mother had access to Applicant’s
accounts. She stated that her mother told her in 2010 that payments were being
returned but she did not understand the reasons for the returned checks. Her mother
called the bank but did not received an explanation.
Applicant’s net monthly pay is about $3,000.  She has a car note which is current.
She has a net remainder of about $400. She is current with her other bills. Her credit
reports confirm that she has accounts that are “paid as agreed.” She acknowledged that
she has not sought financial counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
5
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that she incurred delinquent debt when two properties that she
bought in 2007 went to default. The outstanding debts are about $137,000. Her credit
reports confirm the debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security
concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has unresolved
financial issues concerning the two home loan mortgages. She is awaiting more
information and is deciding on a course of action which might involve bankruptcy.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant was deployed to
Afghanistan and left the two properties under the care of her mother. Her mother had
access to Applicant’s accounts. Applicant did not monitor the mortgage payments and
did not learn until almost 2011 that payments had been missed and the mortgages were
in default. It was not entirely unreasonable to leave the properties in the care of her
mother, but Applicant made no effort to monitor two mortgage agreements for two
accounts that had a value of over $100,000. She did not act responsibly under the
circumstances.   
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
made payments when she learned about the events in 2011. She contacted the banks
and is trying to deal with the situation. However, she has no plan in place. She
considered bankruptcy but is not sure she wants to proceed in that direction.  FC MC AG
¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not
apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 46 years old.  She served in the U.S. Navy and received an honorable
discharge. She also served in the Reserves. She has been with her current employer
since 2004. She is single and has no children. When she was deployed in 2009, she left
the financial control of two home mortgages valued at over $100,000 with her mother.
She has exercised some good faith efforts to resolve the issues, but she has no plan in
place to further resolve these debts. The situation is not resolved nor under control.
Granted, Applicant has not incurred new delinquent debt and has not had any other
difficulties. She elected to purchase two properties in 2007 and made payments, but
when deployed she did not monitor the mortgage accounts.
Applicant made a bad decision. She has learned from that decision. However,
due to the nature of the mortgages, the amount of time these properties have been in
foreclosure, and the amount of debt, the situation is not resolved.   
Applicant did not persuade me that she refuted or mitigated the Government’s
case concerning the financial considerations security concerns. Any doubts must be
resolved in the Government’s favor. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
