 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02682 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 9, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on December 7, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on December 16, 2015. She responded with a letter and an e-mail 
that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (Ex) A and B. The case was assigned to me on 
January 5, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A and B are 
admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. It is not clear whether she is a current employee or a 
prospective employee of a defense contractor. She attended a business trade school in 
2010, but she did not earn a degree. She married in 1987 and divorced in 1994. She 
has two adult children.1   
 
Applicant’s father owned a restaurant that was placed under Applicant’s name 
even though she did not have anything to do with the operation of the business. Her 
father leased the restaurant to a third party, who did not pay the utility bills for more than 
a year. In December 2010, the utility company obtained a $7,017 judgment, plus 
attorney’s fees, interest, and costs, against Applicant, as the named owner of the 
restaurant. Applicant settled the judgment in June 2013. Applicant incurred additional 
delinquent debts, which she attributed to being a single mother and working overseas.2 
 
The SOR alleges the $7,017 judgment and ten additional delinquent debts 
totaling $13,110. Two of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.j - $764 balance and 1.k – no balance 
alleged) are duplicate accounts. Medical debts ranging from $51 to $394 and totaling 
about $741 comprise five of the SOR allegations. The remaining debts consist of a 
student loan ($3,432), a charged-off motorcycle loan ($7,486), and a collection account 
($667).3   
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $3,452 past-due student loan. Applicant paid the loan in full 
with a $2,600 payment in July 2015. She also paid in full two other student loans 
totaling $6,320 that were not delinquent.4 
 
The collection company handling two of the collection accounts ($764 and $667) 
notified Applicant that the company “has closed and will not be collecting on the 
[accounts].” The company further stated that Applicant had “no further obligation 
regarding th[ese] account[s].”5 
 
Applicant attempted to pay her medical debts. She paid the $51 debt in February 
2015. She settled the $394 medical account for $137, which she paid in September 
2015. The remaining three medical debts do not appear on the two most recent credit 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 1-5.  
 
3 Items 1-5.  
 
4 Items 1-5.  
 
5 Items 1-5.  
 
3 
 
reports. Applicant contacted the collection company that was handling the debts. She 
was informed that the company had no records of the account numbers alleged in the 
SOR.6 
 
Applicant owned a motorcycle in about July 2008. It was repossessed in about 
June 2009. She thought the repossession resolved her loan, but the credit reports show 
the loan as charged off with a $7,486 balance. This debt has not been paid.7 
 
Applicant worked in Iraq for a defense contractor from 2011 to 2013. Her current 
employment status is unclear, but she indicated that she was hoping to receive a 
favorable adjudication of her security clearance so that she could “return to work 
overseas with [her] most recent employer.” She stated that she was continuing to work 
diligently to improve her finances.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
6 Items 1-5.  
 
7 Items 1-5.  
 
8 Items 1, 2.  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant paid, settled, or otherwise resolved all but one of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. She also paid in full two student loans that were not delinquent and not 
alleged in the SOR. She stated that she was continuing to work diligently to improve her 
finances. 
 
  I find that Applicant established a plan to resolve her financial problems, and she 
took significant action to implement that plan. She acted responsibly and made a good-
faith effort to pay her debts. There are clear indications that her financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely 
applicable because Applicant is still in the process of paying her debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
