 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00908 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2015, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. On October 23, 2015, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on October 26, 2015, and it was received on November 3, 2015. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. There were no 
objections by Applicant or Department Counsel to any evidence offered. The 
Government’s documents identified as Items 3 through 7 and Applicant’s documents 
marked as Items 8 through 15 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to 
me on January 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j. She denied the 
remaining allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She received a diploma from a technical school in 
2000. She has been employed by a federal contractor since 2001, and her present 
employer since November 2005. She has not served in the military. She was married 
from 1986 to 1997 and has three adult children from the marriage. She was married 
from 1997 to 2004. She remarried in 2005 and has a two grown stepchildren.1  
  
 Applicant provided sufficient documented proof that the 2005 tax lien in SOR ¶ 
1.a ($205) was paid in July 2005.2 Credit reports from September 2012 and January 
2015 substantiate the other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.3 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on September 17, 
2012. Her responses to inquiries about her financial delinquencies under Question 26 
indicated that she had a delinquent debt for a car loan. She stated the debt involved two 
vehicles that had a combined balance of $19,000. She explained: “Two vehicles that I 
was cosigner with my ex-husband, he didn’t pay the loan so I had them pick them up. 
Since I am the cosigner I am being held responsible for the amount they didn’t get on 
the vehicles.”4 She further stated that “a monthly payment is being made every month 
on the first in the amount of [$] 500.00.”5 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the car loan debts in ¶¶ 1.b (judgment entered in 2009 - $6,044) and 1.c (judgment 
entered in 2008 - $13,911). She stated the debt in ¶ 1.b was due to her divorce and it 
was her “ex-husband’s responsibility as mandated by the divorce.” Regarding the debt 
in ¶ 1.c she stated that this debt was being paid, and “due to the divorce my ex-husband 
was supposed to pay per divorce.” During her background interview in October 2012 
she told a government investigator that she could not afford the $500 payments after 
her husband lost his job. She provided a document, dated January 6, 2015, from the 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 11. 
 
3 Items 5 and 7. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
creditor that confirms there is a judgment in the amount of $14,491 and that Applicant 
has an installment agreement that required her to pay $1,471 as a down payment in 
three payments of $490 on January 3, 2015, January 28, 2015, and February 12, 2015. 
After that she was required to make $300 payments on the 26th of each month until the 
balance was satisfied. She provided a letter dated September 8, 2015, which reflects a 
balance on the judgment of $11,221.6  
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a copy of a “complaint for divorce” 
that is signed by her on March 26, 2004. There is no proof the document was filed. The 
acknowledgement of service of process is unsigned. She also included a settlement 
agreement that is signed by her but not her husband at the time. None of the 
documents have a court file number, a date stamp, nor are they signed by a judge. No 
final divorce decree or property settlement was included with her response to the 
FORM. The proposed settlement agreement stated that each party would be 
responsible for one of the cars until the note was paid in full. This proposal is different 
from what Applicant indicated in her answer that her husband was responsible for both 
cars. Because no official documents were provided, I do not know if a final settlement 
was affirmed as noted in the proposed settlement. Applicant failed to provide proof that 
she is not responsible for the car note in SOR ¶ 1.b. There is insufficient proof to 
conclude the two loans were consolidated.7 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($302, last activity May 2011); 1.e ($222, last activity 
July 2009); 1.f ($81, last activity September 2013); 1.g ($55, last activity December 
2011); 1.h ($257, last activity January 2007); 1.i ($163, last activity April 2008); and 1.j 
($50, last activity August 2008) are collection accounts for medical debts. During her 
background interview by a government investigator in October 2012, Applicant was 
confronted with and acknowledged the medical debts. She indicated she was unaware 
of the debts and would contact the creditors and take action to repay them if they 
belonged to her. In September 2015 Applicant established a payment plan that included 
four medical debts. It appears to include the debts in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and another debt 
not alleged. The evidence does not include the remaining debts. It is unclear if the 
remaining medical debts were consolidated into the four debts. Applicant made one 
payment of $101 on September 8, 2015, regarding these debts. She did not provide 
proof of additional payments.8 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($76, last activity August 2012) is a collection account for 
unpaid insurance. Applicant indicated that she contacted the creditor and the debt could 
not be verified.9  
 
                                                          
6 Item 3, 4, 6, and 12. 
 
7 Items 3 and 12. 
 
8 Items 6, 13 and 14. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided a copy of her husband’s pay stub for a two-week period in 
October 2015, which also included his gross wages for the year-to-date and a 401K 
loan. She also included an unsigned 2009 federal income tax return 1040 form. It lists 
her husband as unemployed. No other past or current financial information was 
provided.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
10 Items 10 and 15. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, including two judgments, totaling 
approximately $21,161. Her delinquent debts began in 2007. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of both of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that are not resolved. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are still being addressed. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that her 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her failure to timely address her delinquent 
debts casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant indicated her financial problems were due to her divorce. There is also 
some evidence that Applicant’s husband was unemployed for a period. These were 
conditions that were beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide more 
detailed information regarding her husband’s period of unemployment, other than an 
unsigned 2009 tax form that lists him as unemployed. There are two judgments alleged 
in the SOR for car loans (¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). Applicant acknowledged she was the cosigner 
on the loans and that her ex-husband was required to pay one and she was required to 
pay the other. She was divorced in 2004 and the judgments were entered in 2008 and 
2009 respectively. The evidence Applicant produced shows that she did not begin to 
address the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c until January 2015.12 The unsigned proposed 
settlement agreement is insufficient to show she is not responsible for the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.b. Her other debts show delinquency dates from 2007 through 2011. She was 
confronted with these debts during her background interview in 2012 and indicated she 
would take action to resolve them if they belonged to her. In September 2015 she 
                                                          
12 Applicant indicated in her background interview that she agreed to make payments of $500 toward the 
judgment, but due to her husband’s unemployment she was unable.  
 
7 
 
 
initiated a payment plan to address some of the medical debts and provided proof of 
one payment toward the plan. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Applicant initiated a payment agreement in January 2015 with the creditor for the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c and has since reduced the balance on that debt. She began a 
payment agreement in September 2015 for some of her medical debts and provided 
proof of one payment. There is no evidence she has received financial counseling. 
There is evidence that she is resolving some of her debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. 
 
Applicant did not begin to address the 2008 judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c until 2015. 
She did not begin to address her other debts until after she received the SOR. She 
provided proof of one payment for some of the medical debts. She provided proof that 
the tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a and 
marginally applies to the other debts, as her actions did not occur until after she 
received the SOR and seven years after the judgment was entered. The judgment in 
SOR ¶ 1.b is not resolved. 
 
Applicant denied the collection account debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She did not 
provide any evidence to substantiate the basis of her dispute or her actions to resolve it. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She has been employed by a federal contractor since 
2001 and her current employer since 2005. She has made some effort to resolve some 
of her delinquent debts, but did not begin to address the issues until 2015. She did not 
provide sufficient evidence to conclude the second judgment alleged is not her 
responsibility. She provided proof that she has a payment plan to resolve some of her 
delinquent medical debts, but has only made one payment. She did not take action to 
resolve these debts until September 2015, almost three years after she was confronted 
with them during her background interview. She did not provide evidence of her plan to 
resolve the remaining debts. Applicant does not have a reliable track record from which 
to conclude her finances are stable and that she will continue to be diligent in resolving 
her financial problems. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
