 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00103 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 3, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On October 19, 2015, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and it was received on October 27, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and Items 2 and 4 through 8 are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant provided additional evidence that is marked as Items 
9 through 15. There was no objection and they are admitted into evidence. The case 
was assigned to me on December 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He graduated from high school in 1988 and has 
completed some college credits. He married in 1996 and has three children ages 29, 
17, and 15. He has worked for federal contractors since 1996 and for his current 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2005. He has held a security clearance since 
approximately 2003.  
 
In 1998 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He completed the terms of the 
bankruptcy in 2002 and his debts were discharged. 
 
 In June 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
Question 26 asked about his finances, specifically if in the past seven years he had 
defaulted on a loan; had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; 
if he had been 120 days delinquent on any debt; or if he was currently 120 days 
delinquent on a debt. Applicant responded “no.” In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated his wife is responsible for handling all of the family finances, and he was unaware 
when he completed the SCA that there were financial delinquencies for which he was 
responsible. He stated he contacted the creditors of the delinquent debts and arranged 
payment plans with each. The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports 
from June 2014, December 2014, and October 2015. The last activity noted on the 
credit reports on the alleged debts is from 2010.1 
 
 The tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($206) was recorded in November 2013 and 
was released in August 2015. Applicant provided documents showing the lien was 
paid.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,512) is a credit card collection debt. Applicant made a 
settlement agreement with the creditor to satisfy the debt for $651. He made three 
                                                          
1 Items 6, 7, and 8. 
 
2 Answer to SOR with attachments. 
 
3 
 
 
monthly payments of $217.33 in August, September, and October 2015, and the debt is 
resolved. Applicant provided supporting documents.3 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($4,718) is a credit card collection debt. Applicant has a 
agreement with the creditor to settle the debt for $3,302. He is making $250 monthly 
payments that began in September 2015. He provided documentary proof of the 
agreement and three monthly payments. By the terms of the agreement the settlement 
should be satisfied in September 2016.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($727) is a collection account. Applicant established a 
payment plan in September 2015 and is making $83.69 monthly payments. He provided 
documentary proof of the agreement and his first three payments.5 
 
 Applicant explained that it took some time after his background interview when 
he learned of the debts to make payment arrangements because he and his wife 
worked together to establish plans that would fit within their monthly budget. He has 
now become more involved in managing the family finances. Applicant indicated that 
while holding a security clearance he has always protected classified information and 
has been reliable and trustworthy. Applicant indicated that he provided answers on the 
SCA to the best of his knowledge at the time, and he did not deliberately provide false 
information. Although Applicant may have been somewhat negligent in not asking his 
wife about their finances or actually checking his credit report before completing the 
SCA, I find his failure to disclose his delinquent debts on his SCA was not deliberate or 
intentional.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
3 Items 10 and 11; Answer to the SOR with attachments.  
 
4 Items 12 and 13. 
 
5 Items 14 and 15. 
 
6 Response to FORM.  
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant completed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002. Subsequently, he had 
accumulated a tax lien and three delinquent debts totaling approximately $12,163. The 
last activity on some of the debts was in 2010. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant claimed he was unaware of his delinquent debts because his wife 
manages their finances. This is not a condition that was beyond his control. Applicant 
had completed a bankruptcy and should have been more conscientious regarding his 
finances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Since learning of his delinquent debts, Applicant 
has paid the tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.a, and established payment plans with the creditors in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He provided proof he is making payments to the creditors and 
completed the settlement agreement for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He is still resolving his 
delinquent debts, so his behavior is ongoing and recent. Applicant’s bankruptcy, 
coupled with his recent delinquent debts, indicates it is too early to conclude that his 
 
6 
 
 
behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. No evidence was presented 
that Applicant has received financial counseling. However, there is sufficient evidence to 
conclude there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved and are coming under control. He has initiated payment plans with the 
creditors alleged and resolved two of the SOR alleged debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
apply. The evidence did not raise the application of AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) is 
not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He had debts discharged in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
2002. His wife was managing the finances, and he was unaware they accumulated 
some delinquent debts. He has taken appropriate action to resolve his debts and has 
payment plans in place. Although I am somewhat concerned about Applicant’s past 
financial history, he provided sufficient evidence to show he is now acting responsibly 
by being more involved in handling his finances and resolving delinquent debts. 
Applicant met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence does not leave me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations, and I find he refuted the allegation under 
Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
