 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00207 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 3, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on August 31, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
he was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. He received the FORM on September 29, 2015. He 
submitted exhibits (AE) A through C 1-12 in response to the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence (Items 1-5) are admitted into evidence without objection.1 Applicant’s exhibits 
are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
November 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in his answer to the SOR.2 That admission is 
adopted as a finding of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is divorced and has no children. He has worked for 
his current employer, a defense contractor, since October 2005. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in May 2000, a master’s degree in May 2008, and a second master’s in January 
2013. He has never served in the military, but has held a security clearance since 
2006.3  
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guideline H includes 
using marijuana approximately three times between August 2013 and February 2014. 
He obtained the marijuana in each instance from a neighbor/friend who gave him the 
marijuana for his use. He explained his marijuana use during that time frame was 
related to an emotional and stressful period in his life when he was going through his 
divorce. He divorced his wife in August 2013. He stated his uses during this time were 
“in celebration of my divorce, a life changing event that has restored my peace of mind 
and happiness….” He further stated that he discontinued his use when he realized it no 
longer contributed to his peace of mind and happiness.4 
 
 He did not report his use of marijuana to his security manager at the time he 
used it. He reported it when he completed his security clearance application during his 
periodic reinvestigation in June 2014. He claims that he “didn’t think about it [using 
marijuana] as being an illegal act and I did not realize it was in conflict with my security 
                                                          
1 There is a single Guideline H allegation stated in the SOR. The FORM made reference to a Guideline E 
allegation that was not listed in the SOR. I verified that there was no Guideline E allegation and this 
decision is based solely on the single Guideline H allegation at issue. 
 
2 In AE A, Applicant indicated he did not receive page one of his personal subject interview (Item 3). After 
reviewing the document, I am satisfied that Applicant was provided the complete personal subject 
interview, which starts on page two of the document provided. Any information contained on page one did 
not relate to the personal subject interview. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Items 2-4; AE C 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
clearance.” He received annual training from his company on the prohibition of using 
illegal drugs and the reporting requirements for someone who engages in such use.5 
  
 Applicant provided a written statement of intent not to smoke marijuana in the 
future. He is also the recipient of a 2012 company award for outstanding contributions to 
the company, quarterly awards in August 2014 and September 2015 for excellence, and 
an engineering recognition award in June 2015.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
5 Items 2-5; AE C 2-6. 
 
6 AE B, C 8-12. 
 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Appellant illegally used marijuana three times between August 2013 and 
February 2014 while possessing a security clearance. I find that the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
5 
 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s admitted marijuana use happened as recently as February 2014. His 
drug use at his age, education level, and security background is troubling and a cause 
for concern. I do not find persuasive his ignorance of the impact of using marijuana on 
his security clearance or his lack of realization that using marijuana was illegal. I also 
find his reason for use—to celebrate his divorce—demonstrative of poor judgment. He 
is a highly educated individual who has held a security clearance since 2004 and has 
participated in annual training, which explains the consequences of illegal drug use, 
including marijuana, and reporting requirements.7 These circumstances lead me to 
conclude that his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and his 
judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant receives partial credit for completing a 
statement of intent not to smoke marijuana in the future, but there is no evidence that he 
terminated his friendship with his neighbor who supplied him with marijuana. AG ¶ 26(b) 
partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including his job-related awards. 
Applicant engaged in recent drug use that given his age, education level, and security 
clearance status calls into question his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
                                                          
7 Marijuana remains a controlled substance under schedule I of the Controlled Substance Act. Federal 
employees who use illegal drugs are not suitable for federal service (See Memorandum of Director of 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Subject: Federal Laws and Policies Prohibiting Marijuana Use, 
May 26, 2015). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph  1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
