 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00903 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His financial 
problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control. He established financial 
responsibility by addressing his legal obligations commensurate with his financial 
means. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 26, 2014. On 
July 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 27, 2015, and requested a decision based on 
the record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government provided Applicant with the File of Relevant Materials (FORM) 
in October 2015. On December 1, 2015, Applicant requested an expedited hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Appellate Exhibit 1) The case was assigned to me on 
December 4, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on December 7, 2015, scheduling a hearing for December 16, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant 
testified and submitted 13 exhibits (AE 1 through 13). AE 13 was received post-hearing. 
All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on December 24, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant requested an expedited hearing. At his hearing, Applicant stated that 
he had sufficient time to prepare, was ready to proceed, and affirmatively waived his 
right to 15 days advance notice of his hearing. (Tr. 13-15) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.l through 1.p. He denied the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h through 1.k. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old administrative support specialist working for a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1997. He married in June 1998, and 
divorced in December 2008. He has three children, ages 18, 16, and 14 from this 
marriage.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2014 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) that he was 
in arrears in his child support obligation. The background investigation addressed 
Applicant’s financial problems and revealed the delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR, some of which are established by the Government’s evidence and by Applicant’s 
testimony.  
 
The status of the alleged SOR delinquent accounts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a $25,386 delinquent child support obligation. Applicant’s 
December 2008 divorce degree required him to pay $791 monthly in child support. 
Initially, he made the payments directly to his ex-wife. He claimed that he and his ex-
wife were not getting along, and in June 2009, Applicant started making his child 
support payments through the court to document his payments.  
 
Applicant was unable to make consistent payments and fell behind on his child 
support obligation because of the additional living expenses he had after his December 
 
3 
 
 
2008 divorce. Additionally, he lost his full-time position with a federal contractor in 
October 2009, and developed medical problems and expenses between February 2010 
and October 2012.  
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor, and possessed a security clearance 
between 2007 and October 2009. He provided logistics support for another government 
agency’s recruitment efforts. Applicant lost his job and his clearance was terminated 
when his employer lost its federal contract in 2009. After losing his job with the federal 
contractor, Applicant worked as a laborer and first line supervisor for a private employer 
between 2009 and June 2014. However, his wages were reduced and his working 
hours were inconsistent. 
 
Between February 2010 and October 2012, Applicant was diagnosed with brain 
arachnoid cysts. As a result, he suffered from severe migraine headaches that caused 
him to be absent from work for periods of time. He received medical treatment and has 
not had any more symptoms since October 2012. (AE 6) 
 
Applicant’s child support summary case account statement (submitted with his 
answer to the SOR) shows his child support payment history from June 2009 through 
July 2015. The account statement reflects that Applicant made somewhat consistent 
support payments, but most were for less than the amount he was ordered to pay. It 
also shows that Applicant requested a reduction in his support obligation after he lost 
his job in 2009, and that he reinitiated his support payments when he was hired by his 
current employer in 2014. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented documentary evidence showing that in 
September 2015, his ex-wife requested the state to close Applicant’s child support case. 
The reason of her request was “so that [Applicant] can obtain employment. Arrears are 
showing up in background check.” The state’s department of social services case 
information document shows that as of October 15, 2015, Applicant no longer had a 
child support obligation or an accrued child support debt. He only owed the state $14. 
(AE 7)  
 
Applicant’s ex-wife submitted a letter indicating that although Applicant had been 
unable to meet his children’s financial obligations on a consistent basis, he was fully 
involved in his children’s upbringing. He provided consistent assistance and support by 
taking the children to doctor’s appointments, meetings, sports practices, and by being a 
good parent. She anticipated that when Applicant “returns back to fulltime work, he will 
reestablish financial support contributions that had been previously agreed upon.” (AE 
13)  
 
Concerning the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.h (duplicated under 1.j), 1.i, 
and 1.k, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to establish that these were not his 
debts. They were false or fraudulent accounts resulting from him being the victim of 
identity theft. He successfully disputed most of these debts and they were removed or 
are in the process of being removed from his credit reports.  
 
4 
 
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant established that this was a medical debt for 
services provided to his daughter. His ex-wife worked and Applicant’s daughter was 
under his mother’s medical insurance. The medical debt should have been filed against 
his wife’s insurer, but it was mistakenly filed against him. Applicant disputed the debt 
and it was removed from his credit report. 
 
The debts alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g, and 1.m through 1.p, totaling 
$1,250, were for medical services Applicant received. After receipt of the SOR, 
Applicant consolidated the debts, made a $500 payment, and established a $25 a 
month payment plan. As of his hearing day, he owed only $600.  
 
Concerning the debt alleged under SOR ¶1.l, Applicant admitted that this was his 
debt that became delinquent when work was slow. He established a $25 a month 
payment plan with the collection agency and the debt was paid in November 2014. 
 
Applicant testified that in 2014, he was contacted by a supervisor from the 
government agency he worked for between 2007 and 2009, and was asked to reapply 
for his old position. He was rehired in June 2014, and worked for a federal contractor 
until February 2015, when he was suspended pending the adjudication of the SOR 
security concerns. He requires a security clearance to retain his job.  
 
Applicant submitted four favorable reference letters from a senior manager 
working for a federal contractor, a senior supervisor within the government agency, and 
two coworkers. He is considered to be a valuable and productive member of the office 
team. He is friendly, dependable, conscientious, and a self-motivated worker. All of 
Applicant’s references would like to see him back at work. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial situation and accepted 
responsibility for his financial problems. He believes that he has been truthful and 
forthcoming during the security clearance process. He has learned a valuable lesson by 
going through the security clearance process. He now understands that he is required 
to maintain financial responsibility for him to be eligible for a security clearance. 
Applicant believes that with his anticipated earnings from his job with the federal 
contractor, he will not have any problems paying his debts and current living expenses. 
He promised to maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that included a substantial past-due 
child support obligation and several delinquent debts. Financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG 
¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. 
However, the debts became delinquent under circumstances that do not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgement. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant’s financial problems were the result of his divorce, 
his periods of underemployment, and his inability to work because of medical reasons. 
Applicant’s underemployment, medical problems, and divorce were circumstances 
beyond his control that contributed or aggravated his financial problems.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant has shown sufficient 
financial responsibility for AG ¶ 20(b) to apply. After he was let go from his position with 
a federal contractor, Applicant obtained a position with a private company and 
continued to work. However, he was underemployed and missed work because of his 
medical problems. Applicant demonstrated financial responsibility when he sought a 
reduction of his child support obligation, maintained contact with creditors, and disputed 
fraudulent debts for accounts he did not open. I note that his child support payment 
record shows consistent payments, albeit for less than what was required to pay.  
 
 After he was hired in 2014, Applicant started to address his delinquent debts and 
notified the child support services that he was again employed. Applicant’s evidence 
shows that he made payments toward his delinquent debts commensurate with his 
income at the time. Applicant was recently released from his child support obligation, 
and he currently owes no child support. He also established that after receipt of the 
SOR he started paying his past-due debts, and successfully disputed fraudulent entries 
on his credit report. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are under control. With his current job earnings, 
Applicant will be able to establish viable payment plans to address his remaining 
delinquencies. The credit reports in evidence show that he is not living beyond his 
means, and he has no new delinquent debs. Considering the evidence as a whole, 
Applicant has shown financial responsibility and sufficient progress in the resolution of 
his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His financial 
problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control. He established financial 
responsibility by addressing his legal obligations commensurate with his financial 
means. He understands that he is required to maintain financial responsibility for him to 
be eligible for a security clearance. I believe Applicant will continue to responsibly 
address his debts and take care of his children. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
