 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03271 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 18, 2013, and reassigned to me on March 26, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 27, 2013, 
scheduling the hearing for April 10, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and called a witness, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 19, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2010. He has a master’s degree. He is single with 
no children.1 
  
 After Applicant graduated from college in 2004, he worked as an intern at a 
school in a foreign country. He celebrated his 22nd birthday with a night of drinking. He 
had a hangover the next day when he went to work at the school. The headmaster did 
not approve of Applicant appearing at the school in his state. He gave Applicant the 
choice of resigning or being fired. Applicant chose to resign.2 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana while he was in college and thereafter. He 
estimated that he smoked marijuana about once or twice a week for a total of 80 to 100 
times between 2004 and 2007. He has not used marijuana since January 2007.3 
 
 Applicant applied for a security clearance through another government agency in 
2008. He did not list on his questionnaire that he left employment at the school under 
unfavorable circumstances. He also understated his marijuana use. He stated that he 
used marijuana about 30 to 50 times. Applicant admits that he intentionally provided 
false information on the questionnaire.4 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant was interviewed in conjunction with a polygraph for his 
security clearance with the other government agency. He again intentionally provided 
false information about the circumstances surrounding the end of his job in the foreign 
country and about the amount of times he used marijuana. It was only after being 
confronted with the results of the polygraph that he was truthful about both subjects.5 
 
 Applicant was interviewed and polygraphed for the other government agency 
again in 2009. He provided truthful responses during the 2009 interview.6 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-18; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-27, 33-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-29. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
March 11, 2010. He fully listed his marijuana use from 2004 to January 2007, and he 
estimated that he smoked marijuana 80 to 100 times. He listed potentially derogatory 
financial information, and he listed a $400 speeding violation in December 2006. 
Section 13C asked if Applicant had quit a job after being told he would be fired in the 
last seven years. Applicant answered that he had, and he reported in 2004, he “was 
asked to resign from [his] position as intern” at the foreign school. He did not provide 
specific information as to why he was asked to resign.7 
 
 Section 24 of the SF 86 asked about Applicant’s alcohol use. Applicant answered 
“No” to Section 24a of the SF 86, which asked: 
 
In the last 7 years, has your use of alcohol had a negative impact on your 
work performance, your professional or personal relationships, your 
finances, or resulted in intervention by law enforcement/public safety 
personnel?8  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on the SF 86. He stated 
that he interpreted the question as asking whether he had any chronic alcohol abuse or 
alcoholism issues, which he did not. He admitted that, in retrospect, he should have 
provided a positive response to the question. He was interviewed for his background 
investigation on April 28, 2010. The interviewer asked him about resigning from the 
school after being told he would be fired. He fully discussed his alcohol consumption 
and his reporting to the school for work while hung over.9 After considering all the 
evidence, including the other adverse information Applicant provided on the SF 86 and 
Applicant’s knowledge that a part of the U.S. Government was aware of the 
circumstances surrounding his leaving the school, Applicant’s explanation was credible. 
I find that he did not intentionally provide false information on the SF 86. 
 
 Applicant regrets his dishonesty in 2008. He knows that he must provide 
complete and truthful responses to all security questions and inquiries. He has not used 
illegal drugs in more than six years, and there has been no recurrence of any alcohol-
related incidents.10   
 
 Applicant’s witness is a retired military officer. He has known Applicant since 
2007 and worked with him on a daily basis until 2011. He praised Applicant’s character 
and job performance. Applicant told the witness about his marijuana use, how his job at 
the foreign school ended, and about his false statements in 2008. The witness believes 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 29-32, 37-40; GE 1. 
 
8 GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. at 29-32, 40-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 32, 37; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant has matured and learned from the experience, and such behavior will not be 
repeated.11   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 46-57. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information on his 2008 security 
questionnaire and during his 2008 interview. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on the 2010 SF 86. SOR 
¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
6 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant did not correct his falsifications before being confronted with the facts. 
They did not result from improper advice. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) are not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s actions were serious. They constituted federal crimes and 
significantly compromised the process. Refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful 
answers in connection with a personnel security determination will normally result in an 
unfavorable clearance action. (AG ¶ 15(b)) However, it has been five years since 
Applicant’s falsifications. I found him to be credible and forthcoming at the hearing. I 
believe he has matured and knows he was wrong to be dishonest, and I am convinced 
such conduct will not be repeated. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant was 25 years old when he intentionally provided false information on 
his questionnaire and during his interview. Those actions would normally result in the 
denial of his security clearance. However, he has matured in the last five years. I am 
satisfied that such behavior will not recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
