 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-10415 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant  mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under financial considerations, 
drug involvement, and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
a DOHA administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 2, 2015. The case was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me 
 
2 
on September 2, 2015.  On September 11, 2015, a Notice of Hearing was sent out 
scheduling the hearing for October 7, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered five exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 – 5 without objection. Applicant testified and offered five exhibits which were 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – E without objection. The record was held open 
until October 21, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant timely 
offered 8 exhibits which were admitted as AE F – AE M without objection. Department 
Counsel’s response to Applicant’s post-hearing documents is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I.  The transcript (Tr) was received on October 15, 2015. Based on the 
record evidence and testimony presented in this case, a position of trustworthiness is 
granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor seeking a position of 
trustworthiness. He works two full-time jobs. He has worked for Company Number One 
since 2013. He has worked for Company Number Two since March 2012.  He is 
applying for a position of trustworthiness through Company Number Two. He received a 
bachelor’s degree in computer science in 1999. He is divorced and has a 20-year-old 
daughter. (Tr. 23-32; Gov 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on June 25, 2012, for a position of public trust. (Item 2) A subsequent 
background investigation revealed that Applicant had incurred three delinquent debts.  
Applicant was a co-signer on a mortgage loan for his brother which was in foreclosure 
status with a total loan balance of $479,928. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 5 at 3)  
Applicant also had a delinquent medical account in the amount of $570 (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Gov 3 at 9); and a $536 collection account for emergency transport services. (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Gov 3 at 9; Gov 4 at 2) 
 
 In his Response to the SOR, Applicant admits that he was a cosigner on his 
brother’s mortgage. He was unaware that the account was past due in the amount of 
$158,549 and that it was in foreclosure status with a loan balance of $479,928.  He 
admits that he owed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but that the accounts 
were settled. He attached a copy of his credit report, dated May 28, 2015. The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are no longer listed in his credit report. I marked and 
admitted the May 2015 credit report as AE E.   
  
  During the hearing, Applicant testified that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c related to an emergency room visit Applicant made in 2008. One debt was medical 
and the other was for emergency transport. Applicant testified the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b was paid in full, but the hospital and collection agency would not give Applicant 
anything in writing. The debt is no longer listed in his May 28, 2015 credit report or the 
credit report dated October 1, 2015, presented by the Government. (Tr. 21-22; Gov 5; 
 
3 
AE E) I conclude the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is paid. Applicant provided proof that he 
resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Tr. 8, 14; AE A) 
  
 Applicant’s brother purchased a home in 2008. Applicant agreed to be a co-
signer on his mortgage in order for his brother to get a better interest rate. Applicant 
understood that if his brother did not pay the mortgage he would be responsible.  
However, Applicant testified that the house was his brother’s responsibility and 
Applicant let him be responsible for the mortgage payments. Sometime in 2009 or 2010, 
Applicant’s brother told Applicant he was behind on his mortgage and asked Applicant 
for money to cover the mortgage. Applicant gave his brother some money. At one point 
he gave his brother $5,000. Applicant believed that his brother was making the 
mortgage payments. He did not realize how far behind his brother was on the mortgage 
until he was interviewed on June 25, 2012, during his background investigation. (Tr. 32-
40; 44-45, 49; Gov 4 at 1) 
 
 The current status of the mortgage is that Applicant and his brother applied for a 
loan modification in May 2015. Part of the agreement was for three payments of 
$3,134.03 to be made on July 1, 2015, August 1, 2015, and September 1, 2015. 
Applicant’s brother made the three payments and the mortgage has been modified. (AE 
B; AE K) Applicant testified that once the mortgage loan is modified, his brother will be 
able to refinance the mortgage in his own name. Applicant prefers that his name be 
taken off the mortgage as a co-signer. (Tr. 51, 55) Applicant understands that as a co-
signer, if the mortgage modification was unsuccessful, he would be responsible for the 
mortgage.  He still believes the mortgage is his brother’s responsibility. (Tr. 56-58) 
 
 Applicant is generous to his family members. Aside from cosigning the mortgage 
for his one brother, he also cosigned on a car loan for his twin brother. His sister and 
her two children reside with him.  Aside from his brother’s mortgage debt, Applicant is 
current on all of his financial obligations. (See Gov 5 and AE E) He has worked two full-
time jobs over the past three years. His W-2s for 2014 list total wages of $224,882. (AE 
L) He provided a copy of his budget. His net monthly income is $11,895.  His monthly 
expenses total $5,315. After expenses he has $6,580 left over in discretionary income. 
(AE M)  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 In his e-QIP application, dated June 25, 2012, Applicant answered, “No” in 
response to the questions in Section 26 – Financial Record – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts. (Gov 1) He did not list the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c.  
Applicant did not list his delinquent accounts because he was not aware of them when 
he completed the security clearance application. He believed all of the medical debts 
related to his emergency room visit in 2008 were paid by his health insurance company.  
While he was aware that his brother was behind in his mortgage payments in the past, 
he was not aware the full extent of his delinquency.  (Tr. 40, 44-45, 49; Response to 
SOR; Gov 4) When Applicant was interviewed on July 26, 2012, he was asked about 
the debts. That was the first time he learned of all three debts. He cooperated with the 
investigator.  Applicant’s brother provided a statement indicating that he has not kept 
 
4 
Applicant updated on the status of his home. He underwent a long negotiation process 
over several years, but states that an agreement has been reached and the mortgage is 
in good standing. (AE I) I find Applicant did not intend to falsify his trustworthiness 
application by omitting his delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Applicant is a hard worker and is well respected at work as indicated in an e-mail 
from his manager. (AE H) Two of Applicant’s friends who have known him since college 
wrote letters on his behalf. They describe Applicant as being committed to family and 
friends. Applicant is described as trustworthy, honest, and responsible. (AE C –D)  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
 
5 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive or] classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding sensitive information.  
 
Here the evidence supports a conclusion that the Applicant has encountered 
some financial issues in the past few years. The guideline notes several conditions that 
could raise trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 19. Two are applicable in this case:   
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
  
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 At the time the SOR was issued, Applicant had three unresolved delinquent 
accounts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s financial delinquencies appear to be the result of oversight and 
misunderstandings. He was not aware of the two medical-related debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  Once he was made aware of them, he resolved the accounts. The debt 
of primary concern is the delinquent mortgage account that was pending foreclosure 
with a balance of $479,928.  Applicant agreed to act as cosigner on a mortgage loan for 
his brother.  Even though he served as a co-signer, Applicant assumed his brother 
would be responsible for the debt. He occasionally gave money to his brother when his 
brother  said he was behind on his mortgage payments. Applicant was not proactive in 
monitoring his brother’s mortgage payments. As a result, he was not fully aware of the 
extent of his brother’s delinquency.   
 
  I find AG ¶ 20(a) applies because Applicant is financially responsible when  
handling his personal debts. Unfortunately, he cosigned on a mortgage for his brother 
who was not as financially responsible. The mortgage issue and the two minor medical 
debts do not raise issues about Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, or good 
judgment. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant took steps to resolve his financial issues 
and the problem appears to be under control. The mortgage underwent a loan 
modification and the loan is out of foreclosure and in repayment status at this point.  As 
co-signer, Applicant is aware that he will have to assume responsibility for the mortgage 
should his brother default on the mortgage. He has sufficient income to make the 
mortgage payment if this is a possibility. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(d) applies because Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are resolved.  Applicant’s 
brother’s mortgage has been modified and is no longer in foreclosure status. There are 
no longer any negative entries in his credit report aside from the mortgage.    
   
  Applicant is in control of his financial situation. While Applicant hopes that his 
brother will refinance the mortgage in his own name, the possibility of this happening is 
unknown.  However, Applicant is able to step in as co-signer on the mortgage should 
his brother default again. The concerns under financial considerations are mitigated.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [trustworthiness determination] process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the [trustworthiness determination]  
process.  
  
 The following disqualifying condition potentially applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
  
 Applicant is alleged to have deliberately omitted his financial delinquencies in 
response to Section 26 of his e-QIP application dated June 25, 2012. Applicant testified 
that he was not aware that his brother was seriously delinquent in his mortgage 
payments and was not aware of the two medical debts until he was told about them 
during his trustworthiness background investigation interview. While Applicant’s brother 
asked him for money in the past because he needed to pay his mortgage, Applicant 
was not proactively monitoring the status of the mortgage. He assumed that the debt 
was his brother’s responsibility and that his brother would make the mortgage 
payments. I find Applicant’s explanation credible and conclude that he did not 
deliberately omit the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c on his e-QIP application.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered the favorable information from Applicant’s supervisor, and his two 
friends. If not for his brother’s failure to timely make his mortgage payments, Applicant’s 
financial situation is stable.  He works two full-time jobs and earns sufficient income to 
meet his financial obligations. Applicant has learned a difficult lesson regarding the 
responsibility of co-signing on a mortgage. While a loan modification has been 
successful, he understands he will be responsible for the mortgage as long he is a co-
signer on the loan. He has the financial capability to pay the mortgage should his 
brother default in the future. Applicant developed a plan to resolve his delinquent debts. 
He will likely be more proactive in monitoring his brother’s mortgage payment history 
now that he has learned that delinquent debts can raise issues of trustworthiness or 
security significance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant’s application for a trustworthiness position should be granted.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Erin C. Hogan 
Administrative Judge 
