1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 09-04594
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Ireland. Born in Ireland, she
immigrated to the United States with her family when she was a young child. She
completed her education in the United States, and then served 26 years of honorable
military service in the U.S. Air Force, retiring in 2005. She obtained U.S. citizenship in
2006. Several months later she renewed an Irish passport previously issued to her in
1996. She possessed the passport until April 2010, when it was destroyed in the
presence of her company’s facility security officer. The record contains sufficient
evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate any foreign preference security concerns.
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit D. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on December 14,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline C for foreign preference. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me February 22, 2010. The hearing took place April 8, 2010. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received April 13, 2010. 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentary
evidence. On April 13, 2010, she made a timely submission, and the post-hearing
matter is admitted, without objections, as Exhibit F. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is widowed and
has three children, two stepchildren (both adults) from her husband’s previous marriage,
and one child (an adult daughter) from her marriage. She has lived at the same address
since 1998. She has worked as a registrar for a defense contractor since March 2009.
Her duties as a registrar involve registering students for various training classes and
processing related records for a special operations unit.     
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Ireland; she obtained U.S.
citizenship in 2006. Born in Ireland, she immigrated to the United States with her family
when she was a young child. She completed her education in the United States, and
she then enlisted in the U.S. Air Force.
She served 26 years in the Air Force before retiring as a senior
noncommissioned officer in 2005.  Of those 26 years, she served the last 23 years in2
 Tr. 62. 3
 Exhibits A, B, and C. 4
 Tr. 47–49, 57–59. 5
 Tr. 59. 6
 Tr. 47. 7
 Exhibit F. 8
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a9
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
3
the field of education and training. She did not hold a security clearance because her
military duties did not require it.  Her certificate of release or discharge from active duty3
(DD Form 214) shows a successful military career, and it reflects decorations, medals,
and military education consistent with her grade or rank and years of service. Her DD
Form 214 is also consistent with the highly laudatory letters of recommendation
submitted in support of Applicant’s security clearance application.4
After retiring from the Air Force, Applicant was a full-time care giver for her
husband. Like Applicant, her husband also served more than two decades of active duty
in the Air Force. Her husband passed away in late 2008, and Applicant returned to the
work force with her current employer in early 2009.
Applicant first obtained an Irish passport in 1996, when she traveled with family
members to Ireland for tourism and to visit family. As an Irish citizen and a U.S. resident
alien, Applicant applied for and obtained an Irish passport for the trip. Subsequently,
she renewed the Irish passport in 2006. About four years later in 2010, she traveled with
family members to a country in the Arab world to visit a sister.  Her intent was to use her5
U.S. passport for the trip, but she carried both passports in case she needed the Irish
passport while traveling overseas for safety purposes.  She was required to use her6
Irish passport at an airport during the trip.  Other than the trips to Ireland in 1996 and7
Egypt in 2010, Applicant has not used an Irish passport. In light of this proceeding, she
had her current Irish passport destroyed in the presence of her company’s facility
security officer in April 2010.8
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As9
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
 484 U.S. at 531.10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 17
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).18
4
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,10
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An11
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  12
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting13
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An14
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate15
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme16
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.17
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18
The Adjudicative Guidelines set forth the relevant standards to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the Government. The Government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.19
 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 20
 AG ¶ 9.  21
 AG ¶ 11(a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 22
5
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the19
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline C for foreign preference,  the suitability of an applicant may be20
questioned or put into doubt when that applicant acts in manner to evidence a
preference for a foreign country over the United States. In particular, concern under
Guideline C is that: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.  21
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions, of which the most
pertinent here is ¶ 10(a)(1). It applies because Applicant actively exercised a right or
privilege of Irish citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen by renewing, possessing, and
using an Irish passport during 2006–2010. These actions may indicate a foreign
preference. 
The guideline also contains six conditions that may mitigate security concerns.22
The most pertinent here is ¶ 11(e). It applies because Applicant had the Irish passport
destroyed in the presence of her company’s facility security officer.  
The facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s renewal, possession, and
use of an Irish passport no longer justify current doubts about her judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. Her affirmative actions in ridding herself of the Irish
passport—coupled with her longtime residence in the United States and her 26 years of
honorable service in the U.S. Air Force—are sufficient to mitigate any foreign
preference security concerns. These circumstances show her true preference is for the
United States, and she is not prone to act in a manner that might be harmful to U.S.
interests.
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have no doubts or
concerns about Applicant’s fitness or suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).23
6
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Applicant met her23
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
