KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s ability to argue for an alternative interpretation of the evidence was not
sufficient to establish error.  The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-08714.a1
DATE: 03/21/2013
DATE: March 21, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-08714
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 15, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 28, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse Decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline H are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is employed as a Government contractor.  She served in the Reserves of a branch
of the U.S. armed forces from 1998 to 2006.  She was first awarded a clearance in 2002 and held
secret and top secret clearances until 2010.  
Applicant began using marijuana while in high school.  She used marijuana about three times
a week, from 1994 until 2007.  She used marijuana while holding a clearance and while holding
eligibility for sensitive compartmented information (SCI).  In addition, she used ecstasy twice, in
2002 or 2003.  
In 2002, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).  She failed to list her
marijuana use from 1994 until the date of completion.  This was a deliberate falsification.  In 2004,
she completed another SCA.  She failed to disclose her marijuana use and her use of ecstasy, which
were deliberate falsifications.  
In 2007, she completed yet another SCA.  She failed to disclose her uses of marijuana and
ecstasy.  She also failed to disclose that she had used illegal drugs while possessing a security
clearance.  These were deliberate falsifications.
In 2010, Applicant was interviewed by investigators from another Governmental agency
concerning her use of illegal drugs while holding a clearance.  In the first of these interviews,
Applicant did not acknowledge her drug involvement.  In a subsequent interview, she stated that she
had used marijuana from 1994 until 2003 and that marijuana was the only drug she had used.  In yet
another interview, she admitted having used ecstasy once.  After further questioning, she admitted
having used ecstasy twice and having used marijuana until 2007.    
In the Analysis, the Judge cleared Applicant of the Guideline H security concerns.  However,
she concluded that Applicant’s false statements and omissions to her SCAs raised security concerns
that she had failed to mitigate.  She noted that these false statements were uncovered by skillful
interrogators, without whom Applicant might never have disclosed her misconduct.  The Judge
stated that, due in part to Applicant’s false statements, the Government was induced to grant her
access to classified information, which might not have been the case had the true circumstances been
known.  In addition, Applicant’s falsifications made her vulnerable to exploitation.  Although
Applicant has shown remorse, the Judge concluded that there had been insufficient time for her to
demonstrate trustworthiness, given the serious and protracted nature of her security significant
conduct.     
3
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence that she no longer uses illegal drugs, arguing that, as a
consequence, she no longer has a motive to provide false information.  She also argues that the lapse
of time since her last incident of misconduct shows that she can abide by rules and regulations.
However, her ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to
demonstrate error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-07127 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2012).  Applicant’s
SOR admissions and the evidence adduced at the hearing, including the circumstances of the 2010
interviews, support the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s false statements were both serious and
extensive.  This evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion that too little time has elapse to
demonstrate rehabilitation.  
Attached to Applicant’s brief is a document dated after the Judge’s Decision.  We cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
