1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-06329
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on May 18, 2006.
On February 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
E and K for personal conduct and handling protected information. DOHA acted under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR, answered the allegations, and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. I received the case assignment on
July 2, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 27, 2009, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on August 27, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-4),
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
2
presented Exhibit (AE) A which was admitted into the record without objection. DOHA
received the transcript on September 3, 2009. Based upon a review of the record,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR at the hearing by adding
allegation ¶ 1.g under Guideline E: ¶ 1.g You falsified material facts to an authorized
investigator during a security clearance interview on July 28, 2006 by admitting that you
engaged in sex with prostitutes, a statement that was knowingly false. Applicant did not
object. I granted the motion to amend.
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the factual allegations in the SOR except for SOR ¶ 1.d and 1.f 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school and obtained an undergraduate degree. He is married and has two grown
children (Tr. 71). He has worked in a professional capacity in the technology field for his
entire career. He has been with his current employer since 1998  (Tr. 72). He has held a
security clearance since 2006 (Tr. 73).
Security Violation
In 2006, Applicant was on his first assignment in a foreign country. He worked
with another U.S. contractor in a U.S. Embassy. In May 2006, approximately three
months into his assignment, he came to work and found a “pink slip” on his desk (Tr.
59). The slip had the words “security violation” on it (Tr. 60). Applicant had never seen
such a notice before that day. He spoke to someone in the regional security office
(RSO) to determine its import. Applicant explained at the hearing that he was told to
sign for it. He claims that he had no idea at that time what the significance was of
receiving and signing for the pink slip (Tr. 79).
Approximately one week later, Applicant’s co-worker, who shared his cubicle,
learned that Applicant had signed for the security violation. Applicant learned from his
co-worker that his co-worker had not secured the hard drive at the end of a business
day which was a security violation. He told Applicant that he already had received other
security violations and that this was another violation, albeit a minor one (Tr. 65).
Applicant’s co-worker told Applicant that he did not want to tell the authorities that it was
his fault. Applicant agreed that he would take responsibility for the security violation.
Applicant claimed that he believed since he was a new employee and that this co-
worker was senior to him, Applicant would not report the co-worker’s violation (Tr. 81). 
The embassy official counseled Applicant for the security violation during an
interview in 2006. Applicant claimed that the official already knew from his co-worker
3
that Applicant was not the person who had neglected to return the hard drive to a
secure place. Applicant received no other disciplinary action (Tr. 83). 
Applicant received training in handling secure, classified information prior to the
May 2006 incident. He acknowledged that he was familiar with the reporting
requirement for contractors concerning any adverse information about other employees
(GE 4).
In July 2006, a Department of State investigator interviewed Applicant at the
embassy concerning the May 2006 incident. Applicant told the investigator that he was
responsible for a security violation at his post in May. According to the report of the
investigation (ROI), Applicant explained that he really was not responsible for the
violation. He elaborated that he accepted responsibility for the violation on behalf of a
co-worker. He explained that the co-worker had several previous security violations and
was concerned that this would affect his employment. The investigator made a note in
the ROI that Applicant lied to the RSO official by accepting responsibility for the violation
when he learned that it was his co-worker’s fault (GE 3).
Sexual Relationship
During the same July 2006 RSO investigation, Applicant was questioned about
any sexual relationships with prostitutes while in country. Applicant explained that the
RSO closed the door of his office and Applicant was told anything he would now report
was “off the record” (Tr. 16). Applicant claimed he told the RSO that he told him that he
went out with a prostitute because he believed the RSO thought that Applicant was gay
(Tr. 17). Applicant further explained that he did this to “fit in.” Applicant claimed that he
tried to please people and give answers that he thought they wanted (Tr. 17).
In 2006, Applicant attended a party with Embassy co-workers and foreign
nationals at the home of a co-worker. Applicant believes that he had four or five mixed
drinks. He reported being sleepy and going into one of the bedrooms to lie down.
Applicant “felt someone walk into the room.” He stated that the person was female and
got into the bed with him. He did not remember whether they had sexual intercourse
(GE 2). When he awoke the next morning, she was gone. He reported that he did not
solicit the female and he did not provide any payment to her for anything (GE 2).
In August 2008, Applicant affirmed to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
investigator that he never had sexual relationships with any foreign national females or
any females while in country (GE 2).
In October 2008, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories. He reported that
he admitted the security violation in May 2006, because he believed he was the last
person to leave the office the evening before, and that he neglected to retrieve the hard
drive from the computer and secure it (GE 3). This was a lie.
4
At the hearing, Applicant provided a slightly different explanation about the May
2006 security violation incident (Tr. 14). He claimed that he presented information “off
the record” to the RSO. He also claimed that contractors were not in favor at the
embassy (Tr. 15). Applicant retold events in a different sequence concerning his
knowledge of the security violation and the pink slip. His explanations were confusing
and self-serving at the hearing (Tr. 16). He emphasized that he remained at the
embassy for at least a few months after the May 2006 incident. He also served in
another country on assignment after that. However, Applicant admitted that he misled
the RSO during the 2006 investigation in the Embassy (Tr. 87).
Regarding the prostitution allegations, Applicant explained at the hearing that he
did not recall whether a male or female was in the bed with him at the party in his co-
worker’s home (Tr. 44). This account differs from his statement to the RSO in 2006. He
was adamant at the hearing that regardless, it was not a prostitute (Tr. 45). At the
hearing, he maintained that he had no idea whether he engaged in sexual intercourse
that evening. Applicant said that he had told his wife about the incident at the party (Tr.
52). However, he reported in one of his interviews, that his spouse was not aware of
that information.
Character References
Applicant’s supervisor recommended that Applicant retain his security clearance.
He applauded his diligence, ability and technical accomplishments (AE A). His
supervisor since 1998 describes Applicant as one of his best technicians who
consistently completes projects quickly and accurately. He possesses a professional
attitude and bearing on and off duty. He is trustworthy in all endeavors. Applicant
presented 25 letters of recommendation from colleagues (AE A).
The embassy official who counseled Applicant in May 2006 describes him as a
highly motivated individual who took great pride in his work during office hours and as
an American representative working overseas. He further described Applicant as a
dedicated professional and a valuable asset (AE A). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
5
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
6
(a) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative; and
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
Applicant admitted to having sex with prostitutes in a foreign country, and then
said he lied to please the investigator. He changed his story about being in a bed with
an unknown male or female in country. He said he did not remember. He admitted that
he provided false material information to the RSO in country in 2006, when he accepted
responsibility for a security violation. He gave another description of the security
violation incident in a 2008 sworn affidavit. He lied to DOHA when he said he was
responsible for the security violation. He did not report the security violation of his co-
worker. A person may wish to conceal this conduct, as it adversely affects a person’s
professional and community standing.
The mitigating condition outline in AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress”
partially applies because he disclosed all of is misconduct to security officials. 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected
information, “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an individual's
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such
information, and is a serious security concern.”
7
AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other
sensitive information; and
Applicant acknowledged that he falsely took responsibility for his co-worker’s
security violation in 2006. He lied to an investigator about the incident. He did not
disclose his co-worker’s security violation until 2008 even though he knew that he had a
duty to report the violation. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 34(g) applies to the security
violation issue.
AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of
security responsibilities; and
() the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.
After considering the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them apply to this
case. Applicant was not credible at the hearing. His various descriptions of the security
violation and his involvement with a prostitute in a foreign country while serving as a
contractor show he is not trustworthy. Although Applicant had never had any difficulty
prior to this time, his admissions of lying at various times to investigators and his
somewhat incredible testimony regarding a male or female who slept next to him in a
room at a party casts grave doubt on his judgment and reliability.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that the mitigating
conditions are not sufficient to overcome the government’s case. Applicant is a mature,
well-educated professional. He served in a professional capacity for his entire career.
He has held an interim clearance. He is highly regarded by his employer and
colleagues. He is a man who has provided for his family. He loves this country. He
wants to continue with his employment.
Applicant’s training provided him with the requisite knowledge concerning
reporting security violations. While he may have been confused at the beginning of the
security investigation by the 2006 pink slip, he accepted responsibility for a violation that
he did not commit. He lied to investigators. He provided inconsistent statements several
times. He admits that he wanted to please people and did not tell the truth. He did not
report that a co-worker was the cause of the security violation until 2008. His comments
at the hearing were less than candid. He did not demonstrate good judgment. I have
doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all the
reasons discussed above, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his personal conduct and handling protected information. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
9
Paragraph 2, Guideline K AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
