DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (RAG) effective within DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
    )       ISCR Case No. 07-02718
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Thomas G. Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 9 April 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F.  Applicant answered the SOR 4 May 2009, and requested a decision without hearing.1
DOHA assigned the case to me 3 September 2009. The record in this case closed 10
July 2009, the day Applicant’s response to the government’s File of Relevant Material
(FORM) was due. Applicant provided no additional information for evaluation.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 42-year-old facilities
manager employed by a U.S. defense contractor since May 1985. He appears to have
2
held a clearance, as needed, since August 1993. He has been married since August
1981, and has three children.
The SOR alleges, Applicant admits, and government exhibits substantiate, 13
delinquent debts totaling over $24,000. The debts consist of state and federal income
taxes (SOR 1.a.–c.) and credit card debt (SOR 1.d.–m.). Applicant attributes his
financial problems to his wife’s 6-8 months unemployment in 2000-2001 and a job
relocation in September 2005. However, an underlying cause of his financial problems
is the large number of credit cards on which he and his wife maintained balances.
  Applicant claims to have repayment plans on his delinquent taxes. However, his
documentation shows only one installment payment in August 2008 on his federal
income taxes. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has also been seizing his income tax
refunds for years in which he has them. Documents concerning his state taxes reflect a
past due balance for 2004, but also that he has paid his taxes for 2006 (not at issue in
this SOR).
Applicant also claims to have consolidated some of his credit card debt with a
credit consolidator, and was to begin monthly payments to the consolidator in August
2008. However, he has provided no documentation of which debts were consolidated
and which debts he was to repay directly. He has provided no documentation that he
has made the agreed payments to the consolidator. He has provided no documentation
of any payments to creditors made by him or by the consolidator.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial commonsense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.3
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that4
it is  unlikely to recur.
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and5
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications6
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.7
3
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties, which are ongoing.  They were largely caused by Applicant’s3
irresponsible use of credit, and exacerbated by his wife’s unemployment and his job
relocation.
Applicant potentially meets only one of the mitigating factors for financial
considerations. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  While his wife’s4
unemployment was clearly a circumstance beyond his control, the seeds of his financial
problems had already been sown. Moreover, the unemployment was in 2000-2001 and
the job relocation in 2005. Applicant has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts
since then, having not even addressed the debts under $1,000.  Also, there is no5
evidence that he has sought credit counseling or otherwise brought the problem under
control.  There is very little evidence, and no corroboration, of any good-faith effort to6
satisfy his debts.  Finally, given his unwillingness to seek or use financial counseling,7
there is nothing in the record to suggest that Applicant will put his financial problems
behind him. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Although I have reviewed the generally applicable “whole person” factors, the
record lacks any information upon which to base a favorable analysis.
4
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
