                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-14764 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 21, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On April 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), Guideline H (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline G (Drug 
Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 27, 2009. Applicant 
answered the SOR in writing on May 14, 2009, and did not request a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel requested a hearing on June 12, 2009, and 
was prepared to proceed on June 16, 2009. I received the case assignment on June 17, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 26, 2009, and I convened the hearing 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
as scheduled on July 13, 2009. The government offered Exhibits 1 through 12, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit A., without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 21, 2009. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until July 31, 2009, to submit additional 
matters. On July 28, 2009, he submitted Exhibits B through D, without objection. The 
record closed on July 31, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d, 2.a, 2.c, and 3.a of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in 
¶¶ 1.c, 2.b, 3.b, and 3.c of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support 
his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, married, and has one child born during this marriage. 
His wife is unemployed. Applicant works for a defense contractor. He has another child 
from a prior relationship, for whom he pays $47 per week in child support. Applicant has 
a high school degree. He does not have a current security clearance.  His salary is in 
the $25,000 to $30,000 range. (Tr. 6, 28-36, 68; Exhibits 1, D) 
 
 Applicant owes $453 for medical treatment he received in 2001 for a seizure he 
suffered. He assumed his employer’s insurance paid that debt. He did not learn about 
this debt until 2007, when he applied for his security clearance. He also owes $2,428 on 
another medical debt. He contacted both creditors about arranging installment payment 
plans, but has not been successful in those efforts to date. Applicant believed that the 
creditor for the $2,428 debt was to resubmit it for insurance payment. Applicant did not 
verify that the debt was resubmitted to the insurance company. Applicant also owes 
$100 for a third medical debt from 2003. Applicant is paying this debt. These three 
debts are being paid at the rate of $20 per month each by Applicant. He started paying 
them in July 2009. (Tr. 54-59; Exhibits 2-6, C) 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports also show $78,000 owed by him on a house he bought 
with a former fiancé in 2002. He executed a warranty deed to his former fiancé on July 
9, 2004. It was recorded on November 5, 2004. The deed was prepared by an attorney. 
Applicant was attempting to rid himself of any obligations on the 2003 mortgage and the 
house. The bank that holds the mortgage told him he continues to be obligated on that 
mortgage. The house and mortgage were foreclosed because his former fiancé did not 
continue to make the payments on the mortgage. Applicant believes the house sold for 
about $30,000, which would make him liable for half of the remainder, $24,000. The 
bank has not contacted Applicant in several years. Applicant made numerous attempts 
recently to contact his former fiancé to arrange his removal from the mortgage. He was 
unsuccessful in these efforts. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 61-66; Exhibits 2-6, B) 
  
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was 21 years old. Presently he drinks 
beer and usually consumes a six-pack a week. He was charged with driving while 
 
3 
 
 
intoxicated (DUI) in July 2004, when he sped and crossed the traffic lanes. His blood 
alcohol content was .19%, exceeding his state’s legal limit. Applicant was also arrested 
at the same time for battery of a police officer, and possession of marijuana and 
cocaine. He pled guilty and was sentenced on two misdemeanors, an operating while 
intoxicated (OWI) and maintaining a common nuisance. The cocaine charge was 
dismissed or otherwise resolved by the state court without any finding against Applicant. 
His sentence was 365 days of jail time with 305 days suspended while he completed 30 
days of home arrest and 30 days in jail. He also received probation. Applicant’s driving 
privileges were suspended for 30 days after which he received a probationary license 
for 180 days. In addition, he was fined $225, and was required to pay court costs of 
$336, and a $50 bond fee. He attended an alcohol evaluation program once a week for 
13 weeks from February to March 2006. The diagnosis by a licensed clinical social 
worker was he abused alcohol. Applicant successfully completed the treatment program 
and received a graduation certificate. Applicant does not presently attend any alcohol 
program. (Tr. 44-53; Exhibits 6-12) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 1994 to April 1998, when he was arrested. The 
arrest was for marijuana possession and reckless possession of drug paraphernalia. He 
was found guilty, and sentenced to community service, and substance abuse 
counseling. He served two days in jail and had his driver’s license suspended. He was 
also placed on probation for an actual total of two and a half years because Applicant 
was out of town frequently for work. Applicant used marijuana until 2004, and then 
stopped using it. Now he remains at home with his wife and child. Applicant does not 
associate with anyone who uses drugs because he spends most of his free time at 
home. (Tr. 37-43; Exhibits 6-12) 
 
 Applicant’s wife owns the home in which they live. The mortgage is $350 per 
month. Applicant’s 1994 Oldsmobile and the 1999 Dodge are paid for. Applicant does 
not have any credit cards. (Tr. 68-76) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2 (b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
5 
 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has four debts which are unresolved. Three of the debts are medical 
debts, for $453, $2,428, and $100. The fourth debt is owed on a mortgage for a house 
in which Applicant lived in from 2002 until 2004, with his fiancé at the time. This debt is 
$78,114. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. From these six mitigating conditions, two conditions apply: 
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The four debts listed in the SOR occurred during 2001 to 2003. Since then, 
Applicant has not incurred any other substantial delinquent debt. He lives simply with 
his wife and child. He has no credit cards, and he has no debt on his cars. AG ¶ 20 (a) 
applies to these debts. 
 
 Applicant is paying on three of the four debts, and has tried to resolve the 
mortgage debt. He is having difficulty doing so because he wants his former fiancé to 
cooperate with him and pay her share of the debt. He is paying $20 each on the smaller 
non-mortgage debts each month. Applicant is executing a good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program.  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2004 for DUI while he was away from work. He 
attended a court-ordered alcohol rehabilitation program in 2006, during which he was 
diagnosed with alcohol abuse. The diagnosis was made by a licensed clinical social 
worker who worked at the program. AG ¶ 22 (a) and (e) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three of 
those conditions apply to this case: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was five years ago. There have been no 
additional alcohol-related incidents after this one-time arrest and conviction. Such 
behavior was infrequent and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness, 
current reliability, or good judgment. AG ¶ 23 (a) applies. 
 
 Applicant continues drink beer, and uses it only at home in a responsible 
manner. He remains in his home with his family after he completes his workday. There 
have been no further incidents since 2004, indicating Applicant’s recognition of his 
problem and the changes in his behavior pattern. AG ¶ 23 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant regularly attended the court-order rehabilitation program in 2006. He 
successfully completed it. He demonstrated a changed pattern of consumption to 
responsible use at home. He completed the course requirements and received his 
graduation certificate from the program. AG ¶ 23 (d) applies. 
  
 
7 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Of these disqualifying conditions, three apply to this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 1994 to 2004. He was arrested in 1998 and 2004, 
on charges which included possession of marijuana and paraphernalia. After his first 
arrest he continued to use marijuana. AG ¶ 25 (a), (b), and (c) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Of these 
disqualifying conditions, two mitigating conditions apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
  
 Applicant’s use of marijuana ceased in 2004. His last use was five years ago.  He 
voluntarily stopped using marijuana as he matured. AG ¶ 26 (a) applies because of the 
passage of time and Applicant’s circumstances have changed with his marriage and 
employment with the defense contractor. The past marijuana uses do not cast doubt on 
his current judgment and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant does not now associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs. Applicant 
remains at home with his family when not working. He is not in a drug-using 
environment. He has familial responsibilities, which consume his time, and cannot 
spend the money or time on purchasing marijuana.  Applicant changed his attitude 
toward marijuana after he became a parent. He has five years of abstinence from 
marijuana. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2 (c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2 
(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is resolving his debts with 
all the money he can spare at the present. These debts arose from medical costs he 
thought were covered by medical insurance provided by his employer. The fourth debt 
 
9 
 
 
is on a house mortgage, and he needs the cooperation of the other owner to resolve it 
with the bank because he does not think he should be liable for the entire amount. His 
medical debts are less than $3,000, and he has no other current debts which are 
delinquent. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol and marijuana use occurred in the past, and was to his 
detriment. He consumes beer now at home, and does not use marijuana. Applicant has 
changed his behavior patterns as he matured and got married. As a father with a child 
at home and another child he supports, he recognizes his primary obligations are to 
other persons, and not to his own pleasures. It is unlikely his past alcohol and marijuana 
actions will be repeated. There is little chance of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress in Applicant’s life as a result of this personal history.  
 
Applicant was direct and forthright in his explanation of his past circumstances.  
The only debt left unresolved is the mortgage on his former home.  Applicant is 
resolving his minor debts.  He extricated himself from the drugs and alcohol abuse 
problem.  His mortgage debt can also be resolved when he has the finances and he 
applies the same effort as he has to his other situations.  Applicant was credible and 
persuasive in his discussion of his past problems and debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations, alcohol consumption, and drug involvement. I conclude the “whole-
person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a to 3.c:  For Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
