                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16231 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is financially overextended and lacks a track record of financial 
responsibility. Moreover, he falsified his security clearance application. He failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (SF 86). On February 27, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied, or revoked. 
 
On March 18, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on May 7, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 19, 
2009. Because of scheduling considerations, it was reassigned to me on May 27, 2009. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled on June 25, 2009. The government offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on July 7, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h through 1.n. He 
denied the remaining SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old acquisition analyst employed by a defense contractor. 
He served honorably in the U.S. Army from 1967 to 1969, and is a Vietnam War 
Veteran. He married his first wife in 1980 and was divorced in 1987. He married his 
current spouse in July 2000, and they have been separated since May 2005. She filed 
for divorce in 2008, and they are going through an acrimonious divorce. He has four 
adult children from other relationships who live independently (Tr. 47).  
 
In June 1995, Applicant received his bachelor’s degree in business management. 
He completed his master’s degree in business administration in June 1997 (GE 1). 
Applicant testified he had access to classified information at the secret level from 1982 
to 1987. He then had confidential access for a few years until 2004, while working for 
another government agency and a government contractor (Tr. 62). He has not had 
access to classified information since 2004. 
 
 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 
2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since April 1997, except for brief 
periods of unemployment from May to November 2003 (when he received 
unemployment benefits), and after being fired from two jobs in March and October 
2005. He was underemployed from February to July 2007, when he held two temporary 
jobs before obtaining his current position in October 2007.  
 
Applicant attributed his current financial problems to three main causes: his 
periods of unemployment and/or underemployment; his acrimonious separation and 
divorce, and being overwhelmed by his marital and financial problems (Tr. 168). After 
his marital separation, Applicant did not care anymore about himself or about being 
responsible to his creditors (Tr. 168). He stopped paying his legal obligations. 
 
In October 2007, Applicant was hired by his current employer. He started earning 
approximately $5,000 a month. He claimed that since then, he has been trying to 
correct his financial situation by paying his taxes, school loan, and other creditors. He 
averred he is doing everything he can do under his circumstances to pay his creditors. 
 
In his May 2007, security clearance application, Applicant disclosed having 
financial problems (being over 90 days delinquent on some of his debts) because of a 
period of unemployment. His background investigation addressed his financial status 
and included the review of May 2007, September 2008, and February 2009 credit 
bureau reports (CBRs), his responses to DOHA interrogatories in 2008 and 2009, and 
Applicant’s security clearance application.  
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent and/or charged off accounts, totaling 
approximately $139,000, which have been delinquent for a number of years. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g (all small 
medical bills likely for Applicant’s failure to make a copayment), claiming that: he was 
unaware of these debts; he was not sent notice that the debts were in collection; and he 
did not know who the collector is.  
 
Applicant’s divorce papers were filed in September 2008. Applicant is contesting 
legal responsibility for all the medical bills outlined above because he believes they are 
his wife’s medical expenses (AE 3). During his testimony, Applicant claimed his attorney 
told him not to pay any debts until the divorce court adjudicates responsibility for the 
debts. He later qualified this statement by saying that his attorney only told him not to 
pay the medical bills. He presented no documentary evidence to corroborate his claim. 
 
Additionally, he is contesting responsibility for the two delinquent mortgages 
alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p (two different real estate properties). One of the 
properties has been owned by Applicant’s spouse since 1998. However, Applicant and 
his spouse refinanced the mortgage together. This property was foreclosed. Applicant 
does not know whether he owes money as a result of the foreclosure. Applicant testified 
he was a co-signer on both mortgage loans. Thus, he is jointly responsible for both 
mortgage debts. He presented no evidence to show he was released from his legal 
obligations with respect to these mortgages.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Concerning the remaining SOR ¶ 1 allegations, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
through 1.h, are his debts, and have been delinquent for a number of years. Applicant 
testified that his debts became delinquent because of his poor financial management 
and negligence in keeping up with his bills (Tr. 154-165). He explained that he makes 
payments to some of his creditors whenever he has money, but his financial situation 
does not allow him to pay all of his debts.  
 
Applicant started making sporadic payments on some of his delinquent debts 
around January 2009, and continued until April 2009 (AE 7). There is no record 
evidence of any effort to settle, pay, or resolve any of his delinquent debts prior to 
January 2009, or after April 2009. Applicant presented no documentation showing he 
had paid, properly disputed, or made any efforts to contact his creditors in an attempt to 
resolve any of his other debts. Applicant never contacted his creditors to resolve his 
financial obligations because he was overwhelmed by his personal problems and the 
attorney fees related to his divorce. Applicant is not aware of what is required of him to 
show that he is reliable, trustworthy, and financially responsible. 
 
Applicant considered filing for bankruptcy around May 2009; however, he never 
followed through with it. He is waiting for the divorce court to divide the marital assets to 
determine which debts are his responsibility. He averred numerous times that he is 
willing to pay those debts that are determined by the court to be his legal obligations. 
Applicant has not participated in any financial counseling and has no budget in place. 
 
I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g are contested medical debts. I further 
find that the remaining SOR debts are Applicant’s debts as established by the admitted 
CBRs, his answers to the interrogatories, and his testimony at the hearing.  
 
Applicant’s May 2007, security clearance application required him to make a 
detailed disclosure of all his employment activities during the last seven years (Section 
11); to disclose whether he had been fired from a job (Section 22); and to disclose any 
foreign travel (Section 18). Applicant deliberately omitted two periods of employment. 
The first from December 2004 to March 2005 with company A, and then from August 
2005 to October 2005 with company B. Moreover, Applicant failed to disclose that he 
had been fired from both company A and company B, and that he had traveled 
overseas as part of his employment with both companies. 
 
Applicant vehemently denied his omissions were deliberate or with the intent to 
mislead. He initially testified he never knew he had been fired, and that he was never 
given a reason for his termination (Tr. 29). He testified he is an honest and trustworthy 
person, and that he had no reason to lie. During the later part of his testimony, Applicant 
admitted that in October 2005, while overseas performing on a contract his company 
had with the government, he was told to take the first flight back to the United States. 
Shortly thereafter, his supervisor in the United States called him overseas to ask him 
why he was fired. Applicant claimed he was never informed of the reasons why he was 
 
5 
 
 
fired. Nevertheless, Applicant testified he was told by his U.S. supervisor that he was no 
longer working for the company, and to take the next plane home (Tr. 180-183). 
 
I find Applicant’s claims that his omissions were an innocent oversight not to be 
credible. Applicant is a well-educated and mature person with experience working for 
the government and government contractors. He knew or should have known that he 
was terminated from both jobs under adverse circumstances. Furthermore, his 
contradictory testimony shows his omissions were not an oversight. I find Applicant’s 
omissions were deliberate and made with the intent to mislead.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented character statements from two supervisors. 
Applicant is considered to be a valued employee. He has established a reputation for 
providing first-class service to his clients. His witnesses believe him to be a responsible, 
dedicated, and honest person. Both references recommended Applicant receive access 
to classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. He claimed that he was 
overwhelmed by his financial and personal problems and deliberately ignored his 
financial obligations. After starting his current job, he claimed he has been making 
efforts to resolve his financial problems. He presented little documentary evidence of 
such efforts.  
 
Applicant highlighted that he is a Vietnam War Veteran, and that he has served 
the U.S. government well in prior jobs, and in his current position. He believes that his 
financial problems do not make him a security risk or concern. There is no evidence that 
Applicant ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”2 Once the 
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 16 delinquent and/or charged off debts that have been 
delinquent for a number of years. I conclude that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g are 
 
2  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
 
 
contested medical debts. The remaining SOR debts are Applicant’s debts as 
established by the admitted CBRs, his answers to the interrogatories, and his testimony 
at the hearing.  
 
Other than the above mentioned medical bills and the payments Applicant made 
from January to April 2009, he presented little documentary evidence that he has paid, 
settled, or properly disputed any of the alleged debts. Nor did he present documentary 
evidence of efforts to resolve his financial obligations. It is not clear from his testimony 
whether Applicant has the financial means to pay his legal obligations, delinquent debts, 
and his day-to-day living expenses. Moreover, in the recent past, Applicant’s personal 
and financial problems overwhelmed him to the point that he was no longer interested in 
addressing his legal obligations. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant established circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his 
inability to pay his debts, i.e., his periods of unemployment and underemployment, and 
his contentious separation and divorce. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not 
fully mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. He presented little evidence of debt 
payments, contacts with creditors, and settlement or negotiations to resolve his SOR 
 
8 
 
 
debts. Because of his failure to address even his small SOR debts, I also find he is not 
financially responsible. Considering the evidence as a whole, his financial problems are 
not under control. He has not participated in financial counseling, and he does not seem 
to have a viable financial plan to resolve his financial predicament or to avoid similar 
financial problems in the future. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply because Applicant’s financial problems 
are not yet under control. He also failed to show he made good-faith efforts to resolve 
his debts. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(f) does not apply.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility by taking 
sufficient actions to resolve his debts.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security/trustworthiness concern 
stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on his security clearance application 
when he failed to disclose that he had been employed by two different companies within 
the last seven years, that he left his employment from both companies under adverse 
circumstances, and that he travelled overseas while employed by those companies. In 
reaching this conclusion, I considered Applicant’s age, education, job experience, and 
his contradictory explanations.  
 
Applicant’s actions create security concerns under two disqualifying conditions. 
His behavior triggers the applicability of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 16(a) “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.”  
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none are fully established 
by the record evidence. Applicant falsified his security clearance application. It was not 
until after he was confronted that he admitted his omissions. His falsification is a serious 
offense (felony), it is recent, and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a Vietnam War Veteran. 
He is a mature and well-educated man. He is considered to be a valuable employee 
who is dependable, reliable, and trustworthy. He believes that his financial problems do 
not make him a security risk or concern. There is no evidence he has ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Applicant 
expressed remorse for his financial mistakes and promised to pay his creditors. He 
established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to 
pay his debts. These factors show some responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He presented little documentary evidence of debt 
payments, contacts with creditors, and settlement or negotiations of debts. Applicant 
has been employed since 1997, except for the previously mentioned periods of 
unemployment from May 2003 to November 2003, and in March 2005 and October 
2005. Applicant is undergoing an acrimonious divorce and his personal and financial 
situation has overwhelmed him. Instead of showing financial responsibility and 
judgment, he deliberately ignored his financial obligations. His recent efforts to resolve 
his debts are not sufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. His 
financial problems are not under control. He has not participated in financial counseling 
and he does not seem to have a viable plan to avoid similar financial problems in the 
future. Moreover, Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance application.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f,     
    and 1g:      For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.h - 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
