                                                              
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 08-00162 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) as part of his employment with a defense contractor on May 5, 2007 (Item 4).  
On June 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) (Item 1). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 10, 2009 (Item 2).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 24, 2009. He admitted all the 
allegations with explanation, and elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
written case on July 20, 2009. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
 
2 
 
(FORM) on August 5, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns by September 16, 
2009. Applicant timely submitted additional information. The case was assigned to me 
on September 21, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file and the pleadings, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under Guidelines M and E. The 
allegation under Guideline M involves the use of a company computer to access, view, 
and download pornographic material in violation of company policy. The Guideline E 
violations include use of the company computer to access pornographic material in 
violation of company policy, the use of marijuana between September 1996 and 
December 2000, and a state tax lien placed against him in June 1998. I thoroughly and 
carefully reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 35 years old and a security consultant for a defense contractor. He 
has worked in various capacities as a security consultant in the defense industry for 
over five years. He was granted access to classified information in 2005, but his access 
was revoked in May 2006. It appears from the file that he may have been granted 
interim access to classified information after 2006. He is married with at least one child. 
He served four years on active duty in the Navy and received an Honorable Discharge 
(Item 4, e-QIP).   
 
 Applicant was a facility security officer for a defense contractor in May 2006, 
when pornographic material was found on his computer. His company's policy prohibits 
accessing and downloading pornographic material using a company computer. 
Applicant was immediately terminated from his position as the facility security officer 
(Items 5 and 6). Applicant admits the conduct but feels he has been sufficiently 
punished. He feels he is not a threat to national security and has been punished 
enough. Applicant may have been granted interim access to classified information by 
another defense contractor within a month of being terminated by his previous 
employer. He has continued to work in security since June 2006, been promoted, 
received raises, and advanced to a senior security specialist. In this capacity, he has 
advised and assisted other government agencies with security issues. Applicant stated 
his worst problem concerning the pornographic material was telling his wife. However, 
she has been supportive. (Response to FORM, received DOHA September 8, 2009).  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file a state income return for tax year 1998. 
Applicant completed his federal and state tax returns as normal. He thought he had 
mailed both forms. He received a federal tax refund and thought he had received his 
state tax refund. When he was advised by the state that he had not filed the return, he 
looked for his return to verify it had been filed. Instead, he found his state tax return still 
in the envelope in the file ready for mailing. Applicant mailed his state tax return, paid 
the penalties, and the debt is resolved (Response to FORM, received DOHA September 
8, 2009). 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana about 20 times from September 1996 until 
December 2000. Applicant was in his early 20s at the time. He has not used marijuana 
since January 2003, and regrets the use of marijuana while he was a young man. He 
also was concerned because his father used drugs during the Vietnam era and recently 
died of throat cancer (Response to SOR, dated June 24, 2009; Response to Form, 
received DOHA, September 8, 2009). 
 
 Applicant informed his wife of his conduct concerning pornography and the 
reasons he was terminated. He uses himself as an example when he teaches classes 
as a security consultant of the security consequences of drug abuse and misuse of 
information technology. He is involved in community activities of his homeowners' 
association and neighborhood watch. He is also more active in his church. The facility 
security officer (FSO) for one of the companies he advises noted that Applicant is a 
professional dedicated to his work. He does not question Applicant's loyalty and does 
not consider Applicant a danger with managing classified information. Applicant has 
ensured that the facility security officer's company stays in compliance with security 
requirements. He discussed Applicant's prior conduct with him and he is convinced that 
Applicant's inappropriate conduct will not happen again (Response to FORM, received 
DOHA September 8, 2009). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining to 
information technology systems may raise security concerns about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness or ability to properly 
protect sensitive systems, networks and information (AG ¶ 39). Applicant's conduct in 
accessing, viewing, and downloading pornographic material on a company computer in 
violation of company policy raises Information Technology Disqualifying Condition (IT 
DC) ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system).   
 
 I considered Information Technology Mitigating Conditions (IT MC) AG ¶ 41 (a) 
(so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); IT MC AG ¶ 41 (b) (the 
misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency and 
effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's password or computer when no 
other timely alternative was readily available); and IT MC AG ¶ 41(c) (the conduct was 
unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct 
the situation and by notification of supervisor). I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant deliberately accessed, viewed, and downloaded 
pornography on his company computer in 2006. He was then the facility security officer 
responsible for the company's compliance with security procedures and its security 
posture. It was done for his own gratification and not to advance any company 
programs or issue. This breach of the technology system in violation of company policy 
is even more serious since Applicant was the company facility security officer. It was his 
duty to ensure the security worthiness of his company and the proper use of their 
computer systems. I find against Applicant as to Guideline M. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because 
it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  
 
 Applicant's downloading of pornographic material in violation of company policy, 
his use of marijuana, and his failure to file a state income tax return raises Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in 
several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under 
any single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safe guard protected information); PC DC AG ¶ 16(d) 
(credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and 
may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined 
with all available information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to 
consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations); and PC DC AG ¶ 16(e) 
(personal conduct or concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities 
which, if known, may affect the person's personal professional, or community standing). 
This type of conduct, whether known or not, involves questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
These events raise concerns about Applicant's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.   
 
 I have also considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) AG ¶ 
17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and PC MC AG ¶ 19(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress). Much time has passed 
since Applicant used marijuana. He has not used the drug since January 2003, over six 
years ago. His last use happened a long time ago and there has been an appropriate 
period of abstinence. His past marijuana use is unlikely to recur and does not now cast 
doubt on his trustworthiness or reliability. His failure to file a state tax return was a one-
time inadvertent occurrence. I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns about 
his failure to file a state tax return and marijuana use.  
 
 However, Applicant misuse of information technology systems in violation of 
company policy has not been mitigated. He used his company computer in violation of 
 
6 
 
company policy prohibiting download of pornographic material. This is a serious breach 
of company policy as well as personal conduct that is questionable and shows an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. This conduct occurred in 2006, only 
three years ago. Applicant was then his company's facility security officer. He knew and 
understood the ramifications of his conduct for his security clearance. Knowing this, he 
still accessed, viewed, and downloaded pornographic material. This offense happened 
recently and is serious. It can recur at any time and at the stroke of a computer key. I 
find against Applicant as to Personal Conduct.   
 
 “Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonssense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.   
 
 Applicant has not established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment. To the contrary, his accessing, viewing, and downloading pornographic 
material on a company computer when he was the facility security officer is a strong 
indicator that he will be untrustworthy, unreliable, and use poor judgment in the 
management of classified material. He has established that his past use of marijuana 
and his inadvertent failure to file a state tax return in 1998 is not of security significance. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns arising from his misuse of technology information systems and 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
