1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-07970
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant answered and signed his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on
February 28, 2007. On June 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 29, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
DOHA received the request and the case was assigned to me on August 5, 2009.
Applicant and Department Counsel agreed to a September 30, 2009 hearing date. On
August 27, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for that date.
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted five exhibits
(GE) 1-5 without objection. Applicant submitted five exhibits (AE) A-E which were
2
admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on October 6, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his June 30, 2009 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k of the SOR with explanations. 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1992. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1995 until 2003. He obtained his
undergraduate degree in naval aviation. Applicant married in 1999 and divorced in
2009. He has two children from that marriage. He has worked for his current employer
since March 2006 (GE 1). 
Applicant’s transition from his military career to civilian employment was difficult.
He was completing his college courses and trying to find employment. He was actively
searching for employment at least six months prior to his separation from the military
(Tr. 31). He was not able to pay his bills in 2003-2004 due to unemployment. His first
full-time employment was in July 2004. He remained in that position until February
2006. He earned approximately $34,000 a year. He could not sustain himself on that
salary. His home was foreclosed in 2005.
The SOR alleges eleven delinquent debts, including a voluntary auto
repossession and credit card accounts. The delinquent debts total approximately
$40,000 (GE 3). Applicant contacted his creditors. He drained his savings and had only
a very small amount to offer his creditors. He explained that they were not willing to
work with him but wanted a full amount (Tr. ). He does not want to file for bankruptcy.
He told his employer about his financial situation when he was first employed.   
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He does not have a repayment
plan for any of his debts. He states he does not know how to contact many of the
creditors. However, he has received two raises during his current employment. He has
not used any of his almost $13,000 raise to pay any of his accounts. Some of his debts
are small and could be paid or settled. He admitted at the hearing that he knows if he
waits seven years the debts will be removed from his credit reports. He also
acknowledged that before he and his wife separated, he co-signed a loan for an
expensive auto in 2007. This car note required $800 a month.  
Applicant’s monthly net income is approximately $3,101. He also receives a
check for disability. He is paying monthly child support in the amount of $1,101. He has
a retirement account. He sends money to his mother who is ill. He visits her in her home
country. His student loans are in deferment. He has one credit card (Tr. 63).
Applicant loves his job. He wants to continue his work. He loves this country. His
employer praises his performance in his position (AE C). He manages government
3
property. He is responsible and professional. He has received commendations and
letters of appreciation for his work with his current employer (AE D). Applicant is
deemed a competent, dedicated employee (AE E).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
4
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over time. He admits that he
has $40,000 in delinquent debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying
conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the concerns may be
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant
acknowledged that his delinquent debts have been in existence since 2004. He has not
paid any of the accounts. He co-signed for an expensive car in 2007. This mitigating
condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s transition
from the military to civilian life was difficult. He was unemployed for a period of time in
2004. He did not earn very much money when he became employed. His separation
and divorce also impacted his financial situation. This may have exacerbated the
problem, but he has not acted responsibly by paying the accounts. He has been steadily
employed since 2004. Some of the accounts were delinquent prior to that time. He has
not prioritized his debts. This mitigating condition is not applicable.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
5
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received financial counseling. He has not
resolved the delinquent accounts. His efforts are insufficient to carry his burden in this
case. I conclude these mitigating conditions do not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are insufficient to
overcome the Government’s case. Applicant has been steadily employed since 2004.
He has worked for a defense contractor since 2006. While he noted that his separation
and divorce contributed to his problems, he admitted that he is ultimately responsible for
the debts. When he learned of the delinquent accounts, he did not take action to resolve
the debts. 
Applicant has served honorably in the U.S. Navy. He is paying child support for
his daughter. He loves this country and wants to continue in his employment. He sends
money to his mother who lives out of the country and is ill. He faced unemployment
when leaving the military. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
issues.
.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: - 1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
