 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08980 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and a “whole person” analysis. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-86) on February 16, 
2008. On January 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was signed and notarized on February 6, 2009. 
However, it was not complete when it was received by DOHA. Applicant then submitted 
a complete answer, which was signed and notarized on February 27, 2009. He 
requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 7, 2009. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 8. By letter dated August 10, 2009, DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information 
and objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on August 19, 2009. 
His response was due not later than September 18, 2009. Within the required time 
period, he submitted an explanatory cover letter and seven attachments. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s submission. On September 17, 2009, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s submission as Item 9 and 
admitted it to the record.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of financial delinquency under AG ¶ 18, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted five of the Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency and 
provided additional information (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.f.). He denied one 
allegation (SOR ¶ 1.e.). Applicant’s admissions are entered herein as findings of fact.  
(Item 1; Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old, married, and a retired federal employee. He receives a 
net monthly federal retirement annuity of $3,847, and he seeks a security clearance for 
part-time work as an investigator for a government contractor. (Item 4 at 3; Item 5; Item 
6 at 18.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant’s wife lost her job, which paid approximately $40,000 a year, 
plus benefits. She remains unemployed. In his part-time work as an investigator, 
Applicant earned approximately $3,668 between January 2008 and October 2008.1 
(Item 4 at 2; Item 6 at 16.) 
 
 In retirement, Applicant invested in real estate. He purchased two properties: his 
residence and a second home, which he purchased in April 2006 as a rental property. 
His home was secured by a mortgage of $355,000. The rental property was secured by 
a mortgage of $253,000. Applicant also had a home equity loan of approximately 
$79,954 on the rental property. His monthly mortgage payment on his home was 
$2,845. His monthly mortgage payment on his rental property was $1,759, and his 
monthly payment on the home equity loan was $632. (Item 9 at 5, 14.) 
 
1The record does not specify whether taxes had been deducted from the amounts Applicant reported as 
part-time income.   
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 In August 2007, Applicant’s tenants moved out. He tried to sell the property, but 
was unable to do so. He contacted the mortgage lender and sought a loan modification 
agreement. He executed a loan modification agreement with the lender, and he found 
another tenant in January 2008. He charged the second tenant a monthly rent of 
$1,500. In May 2008, Applicant had the tenant served with a demand for rent. When the 
tenant failed to pay the rent within the specified time period, she was evicted. (Item 9 at 
1, 11-12.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties continued. He was unable to find reliable renters, 
and he was unable to pay the two mortgages and the home equity loan unless he 
received rent from one of the properties. As a result of the downturn in the real estate 
market, he was unable to sell the properties. In June 2008, to avoid foreclosure, he 
agreed to short sale proceedings for the two properties. In March 2009, the rental 
property was sold in a short sale2 for the purchase price of $274,207. In his Answer to 
the SOR and in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant asserted that the home 
equity loan was rolled into the short sale of the rental property, but he provided no 
documentation to corroborate this statement. In April 2009, his residence was sold in a 
short sale for an unspecified amount. The home equity loan debt of $79,954 was 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a.; the rental property debt of $253,000 was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b.; 
and the home mortgage debt of $355,000 was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. (Item 1; Item 3; 
Item 4; Item 6 at 2-3; Item 9 at 1, 13-19.)    
 
  In documentation filed on September 26, 2007, with his mortgage lender, 
Applicant, identifying himself as “borrower,” reported the following net monthly income: 
wages, $3,965; annuity; $4,462; paycheck deductions, $1,112. In documentation filed 
with DOHA on November 9, 2008, Applicant reported a net monthly income of $3,848, 
monthly fixed expenses of $2,695; credit card and consumer debt payments of $1,288; 
and a negative monthly remainder of $135. He reported no monthly payments on the 
real property mortgages, which he stated were in short sale status. (Item 9 at 5; Item 6 
at 13-14.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant also listed monthly financial 
obligations of $688 and $423 for installment payments on two automobiles. The total 
indebtedness on the two automobile loans was $31,378. Applicant provided a footnote 
stating that the $423 monthly payment was being made by a relative, who had 
possession of the vehicle. (Item 6 at 14.) 
  
 Applicant admitted a delinquent credit card debt of $6,351, which was alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.c. He provided documentation in his response to DOHA interrogatories 
showing that he had made monthly payments of $100 on the debt in March, May, July, 
 
2 I take administrative notice that a short sale is a real estate transaction that occurs when the net 
proceeds from the sale of a home or residential property are not enough to cover the seller’s mortgage 
obligations and closing costs, such as property taxes, transfer taxes, and real estate agents’ 
commissions. Short sales are likely to occur when the seller (borrower) is in default on the underlying 
mortgage, the lender has given notice of foreclosure, and the seller (borrower) is unable or unwilling to 
pay the difference between what the property sells for and what is owed.   
 
4 
 
 
September, October, and November 2008. He failed to provide evidence of payment 
after November 2008. (Item 3; Item 4: Item 6 at 5-10.) 
  
 Applicant denied owing a delinquent credit card of $1,384, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. 
The debt was listed as over 120 days delinquent as of January 1, 2008, on Applicant’s 
credit report of March 2008. Applicant’s credit report of December 2008, listed the 
account as closed by the creditor grantor. Applicant claimed that the account was not 
his, but he acknowledged that he had a separate account with the same grantor, which 
was current. He failed to provide documentation to establish that the delinquency 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. was not his. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 6 at 2-3; Item 7; Item 8.) 
   
 Applicant admitted a delinquent debt of $568, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. The debt 
arose when an individual with whom he co-signed a car note discontinued automobile 
insurance and refused to pay the debt after the automobile was totally destroyed in an 
accident. Applicant stated he would not pay the debt because “I have never had this 
vehicle in my possession nor [do] I know where the vehicle is.” He further stated: “I am 
aware that a co-signer is also obligated, but I refuse to pay for something I do not have, 
nor ever had.” (Item 4 at 2.) 
 
 The record does not establish that Applicant has received financial counseling. 
  
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
 
5 
 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Beginning in about 2006 or 2007, Applicant accumulated substantial 
delinquent debt and did not pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Several mitigating conditions could apply to Applicant’s case. If the financially 
delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might apply. If 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2007, which caused financial hardship because 
her annual income of approximately $40,000 was needed to help pay the mortgages on 
their real estate properties and their other consumer debt. Additionally, Applicant was 
unable to rent his property to reliable tenants. When his tenant did not pay her rent in 
2007, he took action to have her evicted. However, the decline in the real estate market 
made it difficult to rent or sell the two properties. Applicant contacted his mortgage 
lenders and agreed to have the two properties sold in short sales, and the short sales 
were concluded in March and April of 2009. 
 
The circumstances associated with the real property debts were unusual and 
were at least in part beyond Applicant’s control. Moreover, Applicant’s wife’s job loss in 
2007 was also beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly by contacting his 
mortgage lenders and agreeing to short sales of the properties when it became clear 
that the mortgages would be foreclosed. 
 
The record does not establish that Applicant has participated in financial 
counseling, nor does it establish that Applicant’s financial situation has stabilized or is 
under control. In the financial statement he submitted in response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant reported a negative monthly net remainder of $135 after 
paying consumer debt unrelated to his two mortgage loans and his home equity loan. 
He reported his annuity as his stable source of income, and his wife continues to be 
unemployed.  I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply only in part. 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
 
Applicant admitted a delinquent credit card debt of $6,351, and he provided 
evidence of six monthly payments $100 in 2008. However, he failed to provide evidence 
of a payment plan or continuing good-faith payments in 2009. He denied a delinquent 
credit card debt that appeared on his credit report of March 2008. He asserted he had 
an account with the same creditor that was not delinquent. He failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate that the alleged delinquent debt was not his.3 Additionally, 
Applicant admitted a delinquent debt but refused to pay it, even though he 
acknowledged a legal obligation to do so and failed to establish that he had a 
reasonable basis to dispute the debt.  I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) do not 
apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. To his 
credit, he provided documentation to corroborate that he had consulted with his 
mortgage lenders and had resolved his mortgage debts through short sales in lieu of 
foreclosure. However, he failed to establish that the home equity loan was folded into 
the short sale of his rental property, and he failed to show that he had made consistent 
good-faith efforts to identify and resolve the debts identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.e., and 
1.f.  He has not established a reliable track record of timely and consistent payment of 
his debts over time. Because he has not received financial counseling and appears to 
 
3 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit report was 
sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had [deleted] delinquent [SOR] 
debts that are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his response 
to DOHA interrogatories. 
 
8 
 
 
lack a clear plan for resolving his delinquent debts, it is likely that his financially 
delinquent behavior will recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
