 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04283 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles J. Ware, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 19, 2006. On 
March 31, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 3, 2009; answered it on April 11, 2009; and 
requested a hearing on the record without a hearing. DOHA received the request on 
April 15, 2009. Department Counsel requested a hearing (Tr. 13) and was ready to 
proceed on July 1, 2009. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 9, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 17, 2009. On July 
31, 2009, Applicant retained counsel, and his counsel requested that the hearing be 
postponed because he had conflicting obligations on the scheduled hearing date. I 
granted the request on August 12, 2009, and on August 18, 2009, DOHA issued a 
second notice of hearing, rescheduling the case for September 21, 2009. I convened 
the hearing as rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of 
the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 24, 2009. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the first sentence of SOR ¶ 2.a by 
inserting the words, “by answering ‘no,’” after the words and figures, “September 10, 
2006,” and by amending the last sentence of SOR ¶ 2.a to read as follows: “You 
deliberately failed to disclose that you engaged in conduct as set forth above in 1.a 
through 1.b.” Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion (Tr. 14-16). The 
amendments are handwritten on the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. 
He admitted answering “no” to the questions on his security clearance application about 
drug involvement, but he denied intending to deceive. His admissions in his answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old driver and general clerk employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since October 2005. He attended 
high school through the 10th grade, received his GED high school equivalency 
certificate, and attended a vocational school from January through April 1990. He was 
married in August 1997 and has no children. He received a favorable trustworthiness 
determination from another federal agency in November 2001. He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
 A co-worker for the past three years submitted a statement describing Applicant 
as a trustworthy worker who received positive feedback from his supervisor and 
customers (AX A). A former supervisor described him as “a joy to supervise” because of 
his work ethic and reliability (AX B).  
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he answered “no” 
to three questions about prior drug involvement (GX 1 at 33). His wife, who is a high 
school graduate, helped him with the application (Tr. 34). He did not disclose that he 
 
3 
 
 
had purchased and used marijuana for several years. In his answer to the SOR, he 
stated he answered “no” to the questions because he was not using marijuana at the 
time he submitted his application (Answer to SOR at 2). He gave the same explanation 
at the hearing (Tr. 29). He denied intentionally falsifying his application (Tr. 32). 
However, in response to Department Counsel’s cross-examination, he admitted he 
understood each of the three questions about controlled substances and he admitted he 
knew he was not answering truthfully when he answered “no” to all three questions (Tr. 
42-45). 
 
Applicant testified he had a problem with marijuana use a “few years ago,” but he 
no longer has a problem with it (Tr. 30-31). He started using marijuana around 1991 (Tr. 
52). From 1991 to 1995, he used it about every other weekend (Tr. 53). In 1995-1996, 
he used marijuana once every other month (Tr. 52). From 1996 to 1999, he did not use 
it (Tr. 54). After 1999, he used it only on special occasions (Tr. 55). He admitted he 
used it “a few times” after submitting his security clearance application (Tr. 29-30). He 
defined “a few times” as “three to four – two to three, maybe.” He last used it on New 
Year’s Day 2008 (Tr. 46-47). After he was married, he used marijuana alone on some 
occasions and with his family members on other occasions. He purchased marijuana 
from “people on the streets” on some occasions and was given marijuana on others. He 
denied selling or distributing marijuana (Tr. 83). 
 
In DOHA interrogatories, Applicant was asked about his intentions regarding 
future marijuana use. In his response dated May 5, 2008, he stated: “It’s getting better, 
minimum to none is my goal, as far as frequency is concerned.” He stated he decided to 
stop using marijuana for the sake of his health and his family and to avoid further 
involvement with the legal system (GX 2 at 2). At the hearing, he admitted he still is 
attracted to marijuana (Tr. 79). He has not sought or received drug counseling (GX 2 at 
3). He is unwilling to “turn [his] back” on family members and close friends of the family 
who use marijuana (GX 2 at 3; Tr. 70-74).  
 
 On March 24, 2007, Applicant was charged with distribution of a controlled 
substance, possession of marijuana, and having a handgun on his person. The two 
drug-related charges were disposed of by nolle prosequi. Applicant pleaded not guilty to 
the handgun offense, and he was placed on probation before judgment, fined $292.50, 
required to perform 100 hours of community service, and required to pay court costs of 
$57.50 (GX 6). 
 
Applicant described his arrest on March 24, 2007, as a case of being in the 
wrong place at the wrong time. He and some family members were in a liquor store 
when there was a disturbance outside and the police arrived. Applicant was arrested 
and found in possession of three baggies of marijuana and an unregistered handgun. 
He explained that he intended to use the marijuana at a party. He denied intending to 
sell it. He testified he obtained the handgun for his own protection after being carjacked 
about a year earlier (Tr. 80-83).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant “used marijuana with varying frequency, to include as 
frequently as every other weekend, for multiple years up to at least March 8, 2008 (SOR 
¶ 1.a); purchased marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b); continued to associate with illegal drug users 
as recently as May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and was arrested in March 2007 and charged 
with distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, possession of marijuana, and 
possession of a handgun on his person (SOR ¶ 1.d). The concern under this guideline 
is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 24.  
 
This guideline encompasses use or misuse of Adrugs, materials, and other 
chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as 
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens). AG ¶ 24(a)(1). Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany 
drug abuse,@ and Aillegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). Drug abuse is Athe 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
The evidence raises these two disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on the recentness of drug involvement. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
 
6 
 
 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.   
 
Applicant testified he last used marijuana on New Year’s Day 2008, almost two 
years ago. While this period of abstinence is “a significant period of time,” it has 
occurred in the context of frequent use for five years, abstinence for three years, and 
resumption of use in 1999. He used it “a few times” after submitting his security 
clearance application. He continues to desire marijuana, and he has not sought or 
received counseling. His response to DOHA interrogatories about the likelihood of 
future marijuana use was ambivalent. His use did not occur under circumstances 
making it unlikely to recur. After considering all the evidence, I conclude AG ¶ 26(a) is 
not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts;(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; [and] (3) an appropriate period of abstinence.” AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant explained in 
his answers to DOHA interrogatories that he cannot establish the first two prongs 
because his family members are marijuana users. He has not established “an 
appropriate period of abstinence,” because he has a history of abstinence and relapse. 
His last period of sustained abstinence was for about three years, from 1996 to 1999, 
but he then relapsed and used marijuana after submitting his security clearance 
application. He has not sought or received drug counseling, and he has no support 
structure to help him abstain from drug use. I conclude AG ¶ 26(b) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a alleges Applicant falsified his security clearance application in 
September 2006 by answering “no” to questions about drug involvement and 
intentionally failing to disclose that he purchased and used marijuana. The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). When a 
falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove a “deliberate omission, 
 
7 
 
 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts.” An administrative judge must consider 
the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of 
the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 In his answer to the SOR and on direct examination at the hearing, Applicant 
denied intentional falsification. He explained that he answered “no” to the questions 
about drug involvement because he was not using marijuana at the time he submitted 
his application. This explanation was implausible and unconvincing. On cross-
examination, he admitted he understood the questions and knew that his answers were 
not truthful. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established, because Applicant 
made no effort to correct the omission and persisted in his implausible explanation for 
his omission during his direct testimony at the hearing. He finally admitted his 
falsification during cross-examination. 
 
 Security concerns arising from personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense 
is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s falsification was not minor because it undermined the integrity of the security 
clearance process. It did not occur under unique circumstances. Three years have 
passed, and there is no evidence of similar misconduct, but he persisted in attempting 
to justify his falsification until he was cross-examined at the hearing. Under all the 
circumstances, it casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 17(c) is not established.  
 
 Finally, security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant eventually acknowledged his 
falsification during cross-examination at the hearing, but there is no evidence of 
counseling or “other positive steps” to prevent recurrence. I conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is not 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, but he has spent much of his life involved with illegal 
drugs, and he lives in a family environment where his drug involvement is acceptable. 
He has made considerable strides in changing his behavior, but he has not yet 
accomplished his declared goal of living a drug-free life. His lack of candor on his 
security clearance application and his implausible explanations for his falsified 
application raise serious doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
