                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09444 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant committed assaults in 1997, 2003, and 2006. Two assaults were 
misdemeanor-level offenses, and were ultimately dismissed. The 1997 assault resulted 
in a felony-level conviction. His misdemeanor-level, marijuana-related convictions in 
1989 and 1994 are not recent. Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from 
his criminal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1). On March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant (GE 13). The SOR detailed the 
basis for its preliminary decision to deny Applicant eligibility for a security clearance 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised; and the revised 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct) (GE 13). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue his security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on April 28, 2009, and the Applicant 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge (GE 14). On July 29, 2009, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed with Applicant’s case. On July 29, 2009, the 
case was assigned to me. On September 4, 2009, Applicant’s hearing was held. 
Department Counsel offered 11 exhibits (GE 1-11) (Transcript (Tr.) 17-26), and 
Applicant offered four exhibits (AE A-D) (Tr. 29-31). Applicant objected to the records 
indicating he was charged with three assaults during January to March 1997 (Tr. 17-26). 
I admitted the records showing three sets of assault charges, and explained Applicant’s 
objections would be applied to the weight given to the exhibits (Tr. 26-27). Ultimately, I 
determined that Applicant committed one assault in 1997. There were no other 
objections, and I admitted AE A-D (Tr. 31). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response 
to the SOR, and Hearing Notice (GE 12-14). I held the record open until September 15, 
2009, to permit Applicant to submit additional documentation (Tr. 99-116). For example, 
I suggested Applicant could submit police reports relating to the assaults, or statements 
from the witness-victim of the 1997 and 2006 assaults (Tr. 114-115). Applicant did not 
submit any post-hearing documentation. I received the transcript on September 14, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.h (GE 14). He denied the remaining SOR allegations (GE 14). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and has worked for a government contractor since May 
2008 (Tr. 5, 90-92; GE 1). He graduated from high school in 1979 (Tr. 5). He attended a 
community college for a few months (Tr. 6). He has never married (Tr. 94).2 His 
daughters are ages 29 and 21 (Tr. 96). One reason he left the mother of his children 
was because she was verbally abusive and talked down to him (Tr. 94). About six 
months ago, he lost his interim security clearance, and the contractor moved him to 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2 On August 22, 2008, Applicant told an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Investigator that 
he was married (GE 2). In his response to DOHA interrogatories, he referred to the mother of his children 
as his “ex-wife” (GE 2). His 2008 security clearance application indicates he was never married (GE 1). 
Applicant was in a long-term relationship with the mother of his children that terminated when he was 
involved with another woman (hereinafter “P”). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
janitorial-type duties that did not require a security clearance (Tr. 92). He does not 
currently hold a security clearance (Tr. 6).    
 
Marijuana-related criminal conduct 
 
In August 1989, the police searched Applicant’s car and found drug 
paraphernalia and part of a marijuana cigarette in his ashtray (Tr. 51-53; GE 2). The 
police arrested Applicant and he was charged with marijuana possession and 
possession of paraphernalia for using a controlled, dangerous substance (SOR ¶ 1.a). 
He pleaded guilty and the court fined him about $150 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 55; GE 2). 
 
In July 1994, Applicant and a relative were in Applicant’s company’s van (Tr. 55-
58, 62, 64). Applicant’s relative had rolling papers for marijuana (Tr. 56). Applicant and 
his relative intended to smoke marijuana later that day (Tr. 64). His relative was either 
on parole or probation, and so Applicant accepted responsibility for the rolling papers to 
keep his relative out of trouble (Tr. 56-57). Applicant was charged with possession of 
paraphernalia for using a controlled, dangerous substance (SOR ¶ 1.b; Tr. 55-56). He 
pleaded guilty and the court fined him approximately $100 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Tr. 55-59, 65; 
GE 3). 
 
On May 30, 2008, Applicant told an OPM investigator that he stopped using 
marijuana in 1992 (GE 2). On December 8, 2008, Applicant affirmed his OPM interview 
was accurate (Tr. 61; GE 2). In his opening statement at this hearing (which is not 
evidence), he reiterated that he stopped using marijuana in 1992 (Tr. 46). During his 
statement on the merits, he admitted using marijuana around the time of his July 1994 
arrest (Tr. 59). Then he again averred he stopped using marijuana in 1992 (Tr. 59). 
After Department Counsel suggested he contradicted himself, he said he was a regular 
marijuana smoker from 1989 through 1994 (Tr. 59). Later, he corrected his statement to 
indicate he stopped using marijuana around January 1997, during the post-trial 
rehabilitation process after the assault discussed in the next paragraph (Tr. 59-60). In 
the last six months of 1997, he received urinalysis tests while in a halfway house, which 
established that he no longer used marijuana (Tr. 59-60).   
 
Assault-related criminal conduct 
 
Applicant and his female friend (P) have known each other since 1989 (Tr. 34). In 
January 1997, he had been living with P for three months (Tr. 34). They argued about a 
television program (Tr. 32). The argument escalated to physical violence (Tr. 33). P 
grabbed a baseball bat; however, Applicant took it away from her and threw P on her 
bed (Tr. 33). He pinned P to the bed and yelled at her (Tr. 33). Applicant was so angry 
he bit P’s nose and broke a nasal bone (Tr. 35). Her nose and left eye swelled up 
immediately (Tr. 35). Applicant realized when he heard a snap sound what he had done 
and calmed down (Tr. 35). He thought the swelling of her eye might be caused by saliva 
and infection (Tr. 76). He denied that he punched P’s face or eye (Tr. 76-77). Applicant 
decided to leave P’s residence and to take his property with him (Tr. 36).  While he was 
taking his property, mostly boxes of documents and records, P threw scalding hot 
grease in Applicant’s face (Tr. 36-37). His face was blistered and some skin pealed off 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
of his face (Tr. 37). Applicant said he was on his way to telephone the police, when the 
police arrested him (GE 2). 
 
In January 1997, Applicant was charged with second degree assault and first 
degree assault based on the injuries he caused to P (SOR ¶ 1.c). In February 1997, 
Applicant was charged with second degree assault and first degree assault (SOR ¶ 
1.d). In March 1997, Applicant was charged with battery and second degree assault 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). The charges from January to March 1997 were nolle prosequi (SOR ¶ 
1.e). Applicant said all of the charges alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e related to the 
January 1997 altercation discussed in the previous paragraph (Tr. 37-39, 45, 65-73).   
 
In May 1997, Applicant was charged with three counts of second degree assault 
and one count of battery (SOR ¶ 1.f).3 He pleaded guilty to one count of second degree 
assault, and the court sentenced him to three years of incarceration, restitution of 
$1,500, and a $150 fine (SOR ¶ 1.f; Tr. 74).4 He said the restitution included the 
damage P caused to her own furniture the night of the altercation (Tr. 74). The court 
suspended all incarceration except for 179 days (SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant actually served a 
month in confinement and six months in a pre-release center (Tr. 43). While he was in 
pre-release status, he and P began corresponding with each other (Tr. 43). As part of 
the rehabilitation process, he completed anger management and other classes, 
including drug abuse counseling (Tr. 90). 
 
In October 2003, Applicant was delivering a package at a restricted-access 
federal building (Tr. 48).5 An occupant of the building (O) refused to give Applicant entry 
into the building even though he had seen Applicant delivering packages inside the 
building on multiple occasions over the last several years (Tr. 48). Someone else let 
Applicant into the building. Applicant went to O’s office and confronted O about not 
letting Applicant into the building. O put his finger in the vicinity of Applicant’s face, and 
Applicant pushed O’s hand to the side (Tr. 48-50). Applicant asked O not to put his 
hand in Applicant’s face (Tr. 48-49). Applicant was charged with simple assault6 and 
 
3In January 2007, P was charged with second degree assault (GE 5; Tr. 68). The disposition of 
P’s charge was nolle prosequi in February 2007 (GE 5). P’s height is listed as 62 inches and her weight 
as 127 pounds (GE 5). Applicant’s height is listed as 74 inches and his weight as 155 pounds (GE 6). 
 
4 Applicant did not list this 1997 offense on his security clearance application even though Section 
23a asks whether he was ever charged with or convicted of any felony offense (GE 1). Applicant told an 
OPM Investigator that he did not disclose this offense because he thought he was not required to list 
offenses occurring more than seven years ago (GE 2). The SOR did not allege falsification of his security 
clearance application as a security concern. I decline to hold this possible falsification against Applicant in 
this decision because of this lack of notice.  
 
5 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is the summary of an 
OPM interview on May 30, 2008 (GE 2). 
 
6 Applicant did not list this offense on his security clearance application even though Section 23f 
asks whether he was ever charged with or convicted of any misdemeanor offense (GE 1). Applicant told 
an OPM Investigator that he did not disclose this offense because it was thrown out in court (GE 2). The 
SOR did not allege falsification of his security clearance application as a security concern. I decline to 
hold this possible falsification against Applicant in this decision because of this lack of notice. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
speeding (SOR ¶ 1.g). The court dismissed the simple assault charge because O did 
not appear in court (GE 2). Applicant was found guilty of speeding (SOR ¶ 1.g; Tr. 50). 
The court fined him approximately $150 (SOR ¶ 1.g). His employer suspended him for 
three months without pay as a result of the incident (Tr. 49). 
  
In November 2005, Applicant voluntarily completed a three-day workshop 
involving alternatives to violence (AE A at 2-4). He learned and assisted others in the 
development of conflict management skills, which help with avoiding violence in 
stressful situations (AE A at 2-4). 
 
In March 2006, Applicant and P were arguing in a public parking lot (Tr. 40, 77-
82). Applicant grabbed P’s shirt collar or coat collar and told her that he was tired of the 
way she was talking to him and “degrading him” (Tr. 81-82; GE 2 at 4). Applicant got out 
of the car and started walking home (GE 2 at 5). P drove to an adjoining parking lot and 
was crying in her car (Tr. 40). A woman came out of a nearby flower shop, and P told 
the woman what occurred (GE 2 at 5). Applicant believed woman from the flower shop 
reported the alleged offense to the police (Tr. 41). Applicant denied that he committed 
any offense (Tr. 40-41). Applicant was charged with second degree assault (SOR ¶ 
1.h). Applicant’s attorney suggested that Applicant volunteer for anger management 
classes, and the prosecutor recommended dismissal of the charge (Tr. 41). P did not 
show up in court (GE 2). The charge was nolle prosequi (SOR ¶ 1.h; Tr. 96-97). 
Applicant believed if he completed the anger management class and provided a 
certification, the record of this assault would be expunged (Tr. 96-97, 105). Applicant 
completed nine of ten sessions of the class; however, he did not go to his last class or 
receive his certificate of completion (Tr. 42, 84-85).7  
 
Applicant denied that he ever had any anger management issues (Tr. 87). He 
denied that he was an angry or argumentative person (Tr. 88). However, he hates for 
anyone to be disrespectful to him (Tr. 89). He hates verbal abuse or being talked down 
to (Tr. 89, 94). He recognizes that his anger can build up and then “boil over” (Tr. 89). 
He learned that he should walk away from emotional situations where anger might 
result in violence (Tr. 87). He learned to avoid topics with P that might degenerate into 
arguments (Tr. 88). He recognized the importance of maintaining control of his emotions 
and responses (Tr. 89).  
 
Applicant and P are currently good friends and often do things together (Tr. 34, 
75, 82). He described her as intelligent, dignified, and beautiful (Tr. 43). P has two 
master’s degrees and is working on her dissertation for her PhD (Tr. 75). She is also 
controlling and possessive (Tr. 80). He had a dysfunctional relationship with P (Tr. 43). 
If P does something for him, she tends to use it against him later in arguments (Tr. 79-
80). She refused to make a statement at his hearing (Tr. 46, 75). She did not want to 
make a statement because it might adversely affect her reputation (Tr. 76). He 
maintained that they were still friends; however, they are not intimate friends now (Tr. 
82). 
 
7Applicant disclosed this offense on his security clearance application and said he “appeared in 
court and charges were dropped because of my innocence” (GE 1).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
From 2004 to 2009, Applicant has provided valuable volunteer support for an 
important event designed to generate funds for the treatment of cancer (AE A). He also 
volunteered and assisted with the inauguration of President Barack Obama (AE A at 5). 
He actively supported state-level legislation to obtain and protect cemeteries at the sites 
of state hospitals (AE B). He volunteered at a variety of food kitchens for the indigent 
over the last four years (AE C). During elections, he volunteered at polling places, 
ensuring compliance with election laws (AE D). 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline J (criminal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth 
in the SOR. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
  
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” The allegations of criminal conduct listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.f, 1.g, and 1.h are all established. He admitted all the drug offenses (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b), as well as the 1997 assault offense (1.f). He admitted he touched the victims in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h in an offensive manner, the victims called the police, and he was 
charged with assault. I conclude Applicant committed assaults in 1997, 2003, and 2006. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to his marijuana-related offenses listed in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b. There are some positive signs of rehabilitation. He admitted his drug-
related misconduct. He was more truthful at his hearing than he was to the OPM 
investigator, and in his response to DOHA interrogatories. He admitted to continuing to 
use marijuana until he was incarcerated in 1997, as opposed to his claim to the OPM 
investigator that he ended his marijuana consumption in 1992. Because he ended his 
marijuana consumption 11 years ago (in 1997), new marijuana-related offenses are 
unlikely. He has articulated remorse and received drug abuse counseling. There is no 
adverse information about his current employment, and he volunteers in his community. 
There is a sufficient evidentiary record in this case of his rehabilitation to mitigate his 
marijuana-related offenses.   
 
AG ¶ 32(c) applies to the allegations of charged assaults in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 
1.e. Applicant committed one assault in January 1997, and this assault resulted in four 
sets of assault charges. The alleged assaults in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e are merged 
into the charged assault in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to all of the offenses listed in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. Applicant committed three assaults, and the most recent assault 
occurred in March 2006. I am not convinced that he was completely truthful about the 
surrounding facts involving the three assaults. He did not complete his anger 
management counseling. Although he admitted offensively touching the victims in the 
three assaults, and that his conduct was wrong, improper, and showed poor judgment, 
he also tended to blame the victims, asserting that he was responding to their 
disrespectful or improper treatment of him.       
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is considerable evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana in 1997, and has been rehabilitated from his many 
years of marijuana abuse. He provided more accurate information about his marijuana 
abuse at his hearing than he did to an OPM investigator and in his response to DOHA 
interrogatories. He knows the consequences if he is caught with marijuana in the future. 
He received drug abuse counseling as part of his 1997 rehabilitation. Applicant is a 
valued employee, who contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. 
There is no evidence at his current employment of any disciplinary problems. There is 
no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His 
character and good work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to 
retain his employment after his security clearance was called into question. From 2004 
to 2009, Applicant provided volunteer support for the treatment of cancer, the 
inauguration of President Barack Obama, state-level legislation to obtain and protect 
cemeteries at the sites of state hospitals, food kitchens for the indigent, and  at polling 
places, ensuring compliance with election laws. 
I am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from drug abuse, and avoids future 
offenses he will have future potential for access to classified information.  
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a substantial problem with marijuana as shown by two marijuana-related 
convictions and his admissions that he frequently abused marijuana for many years. 
However, he stopped using marijuana in 1997, and his drug abuse is no longer a 
security concern because it is not recent. His problem with assaultive behavior is still a 
security concern and cannot be mitigated at this time. The 1997 assault was sufficiently 
violent to result in medical treatment for the victim, who had a broken nasal bone, and 
for Applicant, who had second degree burns on his face. His decisions to offensively 
touch others in 1997, 2003, and 2006 were knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. 
He continues to have a relationship with the person he assaulted in 1997 and 2006. He 
did not complete the anger management course as agreed. He was sufficiently mature 
to be fully responsible for his conduct. Assaultive behavior shows a lack of judgment 
and/or impulse control. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not 
fully mitigated the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct.    
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
