                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09888 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 19, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 5, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 6, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 22, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked as AE 
E through Q. The government had no objections, the documents were admitted, and the 
record closed.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 29, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.d and 1.r. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and works as a technician for a federal contractor. He 
married in 1987, and has a daughter who is 20 years old. He divorced in 1992, and paid 
child support until his daughter turned 18 years old. He remarried in 1994, and has a 
son and two stepsons, who are 15, 20 and 21 years old. They all live at home. The 
oldest son works and contributes $100 a month to the household. The 20- year-old son 
goes to school part-time and does not contribute to the household expenses. 
Applicant’s wife recently attended school for approximately 18 months and is a medical 
assistant. She took out student loans to finance her education and owes approximately 
$11,000. She is required to begin paying the loan six months after completion of her 
schooling. She began employment in September 2009.2  
 
 Applicant was employed steadily for 21 years and from 1997 to March 2004, with 
the same employer. He was unemployed from approximately March 2004 to August 
2004, and from August 2006 to October 2006. He changed jobs several times from 
August 2004 to the present, and was unemployed for short periods of time while 
transitioning.3  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are for a repossessed car, medical bills, credit 
cards, utilities, cable service, video store rentals, and charges to his bank. Two of the 
medical debts are now judgments. Applicant has approximately $16,470 in delinquent 
debts that are alleged. He admitted all the delinquent debts alleged except the two 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($213) and 1.r ($194).4 He has not made payments to any of his 
creditors.5 
 
1 HE I. 
 
2 Tr. 40-48, 57-60. 
 
3 Tr. 16, 33-40. 
 
4 GE 9, 10. 
 
5 Tr. 79-88. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in June 2008. He 
was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
August 2008. At his interview he discussed his financial issues and acknowledged most 
of his delinquent debts. He admitted that he had been struggling financially, but since 
being employed with his new employer, he earned enough so that he could begin 
paying his past debts. He met with a debt consolidation company and, at the time of his 
interview, hoped to work out a payment plan within 60 days. He later decided that he 
could accomplish the same thing that the debt consolidation company offered, and he 
would not have to pay their fees.6 
 
 Applicant wrote letters to many of the creditors in October 2008, acknowledging 
his delinquent debts and offering to settle the debts for specified amounts over a period 
of time or in a lump sum. He requested they report the account as “paid as agreed, 
closed by consumer.” He determined the terms of the payments. He advised them he 
would not send any money to them until he heard back from them agreeing to his offer. 
After he heard back, he would pay within 20 days, in accordance with the terms he set 
out. He did not contact any of the creditors by phone. He did not make any good-faith 
payments to any of his creditors.7  
 
 In August 2009, Applicant sent the same letters again to many of his creditors 
offering to settle his delinquent debts under the same conditions, for a specified amount 
over time or in a lump sum. He did not follow-up on any of his letters by phone or 
otherwise.8  
 
 Applicant stated he disputed the debts in SOR 1.d, 1.j and 1.k. He stated he 
believed the debts in SOR 1.j and 1.k are for the same debt. The evidence offered by 
the government show two different account numbers. Applicant did not provide any 
substantiation to support that the accounts are the same. He did not telephone the 
company to determine if the debts are for the same account. He sent a letter disputing 
the two debts, but also offered to settle the debts. The debt in 1.d is for telephone 
services. He stated he contacted the creditor who stated the company had no record of 
the debt. He stated he sent the same dispute letter to the credit bureau that he sent to 
the creditor.9 
 
 Applicant had debts discharged under Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999. He and his 
first wife were going through a divorce and custody/child support issues. They had 
6 Tr. 71-72; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 63-64, 66-68, 92-99; Answer to SOR; AE A-O. Some of the documents do not have a 
signature. 
 
8 Tr. 66-68; 92-99; AE A-O. Some of the documents are undated and others have original 
signatures. Applicant stated that he signed the letters and sent them to the creditors and then signed the 
copies that were provided at his hearing. 
 
9 Tr. 64-66, 68-71; GE 6 p. 9-10, GE 3 p. 2, GE 4 p.2, GE 5 p.2, GE 6 p.5; AE C, J. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
accumulated between $15,000 and $17,000 of credit card debt that was delinquent and 
subsequently discharged.10 
 
 Applicant experienced some family issues that affected his finances. His mother-
in-law had medical issues from 1995 to 1997, and he provided approximately $800 to 
help her. In 2002 to 2003, she lived with his family and he incurred the extra household 
expenses for her stay. In 2005, he contributed another $800 to help her. He also 
contributed about $300 to $400 to help his sister, whose husband was sick from 2003 to 
2005. Applicant provided approximately $300 to help his father who was in a nursing 
home. Applicant’s father passed away in May 2009, and he incurred $1,700 for his 
share of the funeral expenses. In August 2009, his grandmother passed away, and he 
contributed $500 to the family to assist with her funeral.11  
 
 Applicant has four judgment/liens against him that were not alleged.12 One 
involves a disputed amount on a house Applicant used to live in. He stated his family 
moved out before the lease expired because of the living conditions. He stated his 
security deposit covered the amount owed.13 The next judgment/lien is for a medical 
debt that he does not recall.14 The third judgment/lien is from 1999, and Applicant is not 
sure what it was for. The final judgment/lien is for debt on property Applicant rented in 
1998.15  
 
 Applicant stated he has a budget on an Excel spread sheet. He believes he has 
about $400 to $500 in his account left at the end of each month, after paying expenses. 
He stated he attempted to save his money, but had intervening family issues. He 
explained the reason he has not paid his debts is because he has been waiting for a 
response from his creditors. Prior to October 2008, he did not make an effort to resolve 
his delinquent debts. Applicant stated he knew he should have followed up on his debts 
with more than letters.16  
 
10 Tr. 15, 88. 
 
11 Tr. 32-33, 54-57, 61-63, 102-105. 
 
12 GE 7, 8, 11, 12. 
 
13 GE 7. 
 
14 GE 8. 
 
15 Tr. 108-115; GE 11, 12. Depending upon the exact date of the discharge and the date of the 
judgment, these two judgments/liens may have been included in the bankruptcy. I will not consider any 
judgments/liens or other delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR for disqualifying purposes. I will 
consider them when analyzing the “whole-person,” Applicant’s complete financial history, and ability to 
pay his debts. 
 
16 Tr. 72-77. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant presently has three credit cards that are over his credit limit. He makes 
a minimum payment on all three cards. He admitted he missed two payments on one 
card and one payment on another other card, but made a $30 payment on each card 
recently.17 
 
 Applicant provided character letters that I have considered. A coworker believes 
Applicant to be a team player with high standards. His work performance exceeds the 
highest quality of workmanship. His character is considered unquestionable. Another 
coworker stated his team unity, work performance, and ethics cannot be questioned. He 
is considered honest. In addition, Applicant’s stepson provided a letter expressing his 
admiration for him because of his unconditional love and financial support, even though 
he was not his biological son. He gives credit to Applicant for providing guidance so he 
could grow up to be a strong, educated person. He considers Applicant to be a blessing 
and is glad to have him as a father, friend, teacher, supplier, and mentor. I have also 
considered the letters in the record that compliment Applicant on his work 
performance.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
17 Tr. 48-54. 
 
18 AE P. 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a significant history of not meeting his financial obligations. He has 
many debts that remain unpaid. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control”);  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because his delinquent debts remain unpaid. He 
did not take action to resolve these debts until his security clearance became an issue. I 
find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant contributed financially to help his mother-in-law when she was ill and 
when family members passed away. His mother-in-law last needed assistance in 2005. 
He contributed for funeral expenses for family members in 2009. These were conditions 
that were beyond his control and raise the application of mitigating condition (b). In 
order for that mitigating condition to be fully applicable, Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. In this case, Applicant has been employed, 
except for short periods since 2004, when he was transitioning between jobs. He made 
no effort to resolve his delinquent debts until his security clearance became an issue. 
He sent letters to creditors, advising them of his terms. He has not made any payments 
to resolve his delinquent debts. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, although he 
testified that he does maintain a budget and considered consolidating his debts. 
Applicant’s offer to settle his debts shows he made a nominal attempt to contact his 
creditors, after his security clearance became an issue. However, he has not made any 
payments toward resolving his delinquent debts. It is questionable whether a creditor 
 
8 
 
 
would agree to list the debt as “paid as agreed, closed by consumer” when it had been 
delinquent for years and they had yet to see a payment. Applicant does not have any 
payment plans in place to resolve his delinquent debts. They remain unpaid and 
unresolved. Applicant disputed certain debts, but did not provide evidence to 
substantiate he does not owe the debts. I do not find Applicant made a good-faith effort 
to resolve his delinquent debts, nor are there clear indications the problem is resolved. I 
find mitigating conditions (c), (d) and (e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was unemployed for six 
months in 2004. He has been employed since then except for short periods of time, 
when he transitioned to a new job. He provided some financial assistance to his mother-
in-law and she lived with his family for a period of time. He recently experienced losses 
in his family and assisted with funeral expenses. Applicant had credit card debts 
discharged under Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999. He has judgments entered against him 
for delinquent debts. He has numerous other debts that he has not paid. He sent letters 
to creditors after his security clearance became an issue, but has not made any 
payments to resolve any of the debts. Some of the debts are for small amounts. He 
does not have any payment plans to resolve his delinquent debts. Although Applicant’s 
intervening family issues may have impacted his finances at different periods of time, he 
did not do anything to resolve the debts from 2005 to 2009, when those issues were not 
a factor. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
