KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant rebutted the presumption that a Judge has considered all the record evidence
by demonstrating that the Judge failed to consider a letter of character reference.  However, in
light of the entirety of the record evidence, this was a harmless error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-04624.a1
DATE: 10/28/2009
DATE: October 28, 2009
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-04624
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 13, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On July 9, 2009, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On appeal, Applicant raises the following issue: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no harmful error, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: Applicant is 62 years old and had
a lengthy career as a police officer.  Applicant now works as a security guard.  The SOR indicates
that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in April 2005 to protect his house from
foreclosure, and the petition was dismissed in May 2005.  In October 2005, Applicant filed a Chapter
7 bankruptcy petition and was discharged from all dischargeable debts except for a student loan for
his daughter.  The SOR lists eight debts, of which Applicant admits two and denies six.  Some of
the debts in the SOR were discharged in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and some Applicant paid after
he received the SOR.  Applicant attributes some of his financial difficulties to a divorce, to medical
expenses related to hair transplant surgery, and to a student loan for his daughter’s college education.
In his appeal brief, Applicant presents some information not contained in the record below.
The Board cannot consider this new evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence—“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).
Applicant objects to the Judge’s characterization of some of the evidence he submitted.  After
reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings are based on substantial
evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the
record.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security
concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-01105 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2008).
Applicant contends that the Judge did not acknowledge or give proper consideration to his
character references.  Applicant refers in part to the persons he named as references on his security
clearance application and others he assumes an investigator would have interviewed.  An applicant
has the burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  The Judge had access only to the materials before him.  If Applicant wished to have
character references from the persons he identified on his application, he had a responsibility to
provide written references from those persons.  See ISCR Case No. 03-08073 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Oct.
25, 2005).  Applicant does cite one character reference letter he submitted which he argues that the
Judge did not acknowledge.  Applicant is correct in this regard.  Generally, there is a rebuttable
presumption that a Judge has considered all the evidence in the record, even if he does not mention
each item of evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08134 at 3 (App. Bd. May 16, 2005).   In this
case, the Judge stated that Applicant did not submit any character evidence about his job
performance.  Decision at 4.  Applicant did submit a letter from a supervisor at his place of
employment in his response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  The Judge therefore
committed error.  However, in light of the record as a whole, the error is harmless, since it is unlikely
that the Judge would have reached a different decision based on that one reference letter.
 
Applicant argues that he has mitigated any security concerns that might exist under Guideline
F and that the Judge either did not consider or did not give adequate weight to his evidence of
mitigation.  Applicant admitted some of the SOR allegations against him.  The burden then shifted
to Applicant to extenuate or mitigate the security concerns raised by those allegations.  Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  The Judge concluded that Applicant did not present evidence sufficient to overcome the
security concerns raised.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole-
person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts
of a case.  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make
a favorable security clearance determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence,
or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008). 
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against his financial history and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and factors.  Decision at 5-6.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  Id.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4,  2007).  The Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision,  “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
