1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-09406
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 29, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 13, 2009, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and requested
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on May 27,
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 10, 2009, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on August 12, 2009, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Government offered
Exhibits 1 through 20, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his
own behalf and submitted no documents. At Applicant’s request, the record remained
open until August 26, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit documents, but none were
received. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on August 19, 2009. Based
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 24 years old. He is married and has two children. Applicant is
employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 24 allegations (1.a. through 1.x.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F, for overdue debts. The debts will be discussed in the
same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,020, for a
judgement filed against him. Applicant testified that this debt has not been paid, nor has
he taken any action to resolve this debt (Tr at 23-24). Applicant explained that since
December 2008, he has made nine monthly payments of $300, for a total of $2,700, to
a credit counseling service (CCS), and the plan is to pay off his debts over five years (Tr
at 26-32). Exhibit 2 shows that of the $300 that Applicant pays each month, the CCS
takes $269 as its fee, and up to this point no debts listed with this CCS have been paid.
This debt has not been listed with the debt management program (DMP).
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $67. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid (Tr at 24-25).  Exhibit 20 establishes that this debt
has been paid. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,350. Applicant
testified that he has discussed a payment plan with the creditor, but thus far this debt
has not been paid or listed in the DMP (Tr at 25-26). 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,610. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is one of the debts he has listed in the
DMP.
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $156. Applicant
testified that he thought he had paid this debt, but he now believes that this debt has not
been resolved (Tr at 32-33).
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,244. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 34).
3
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $823. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 34-35).
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $401. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid. It is not listed in the DMP, because Applicant
wanted to try to resolve it himself (Tr at 36).
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,576. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but he has recently listed it in the DMP (Tr at
36).
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $214. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid. It is not listed in the DMP, because Applicant
wanted to try to resolve it himself (Tr at 36-37).
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,103. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 37).
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,595. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 37).
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $462. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, and it is not listed in the DMP, because
Applicant wanted to try to resolve it himself (Tr at 37).
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $585. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, and it is not listed in the DMP (Tr at 38).
1.o. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $592. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 38).
1.p. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,000. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid (Tr at 39), and the record was left open to allow
Applicant to submit proof of payment. However, no documents were submitted to show it
was paid.
1.q. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $605. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 34-35).
1.r. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $522. Applicant
testified that this debt is the same as 1.a., above (Tr at 40, 44).
1.s. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,022. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 41).
1.t. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $18,526. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but he believed that the correct amount owed
4
for a repossessed vehicle was $11,599 (Tr at 41-42). No documents were submitted to
show that this lesser amount was owed. 
1.u. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,136. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 42-43).
1.v. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $537. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is not listed in the DMP (Tr at 43).
1.w. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,381. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid, but it is listed in the DMP (Tr at 43).
1.x. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,404. Applicant
testified that this debt is the same as 1.w., above (Tr at 43).
Applicant testified that his financial difficulties began primarily because he made
poor choices and he was immature during the period from March 2004 to June 2006,
when he was in the United States Air Force. At one point, he was considering filing
bankruptcy, but thus far he has not gone forward with bankruptcy proceedings, because
he did not want it to hurt his potential to receive a security clearance (Tr at 45-47).
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a.  The SOR alleged that on or about June 2006, Applicant was “separated from
the United States Air Force with an Under Honorable Conditions (General) discharge
due to a pattern of misconduct.”
Applicant testified that he believed he was only discharge because of his financial
difficulties. However, the documents submitted by Department Counsel establish that
Applicant received his discharge for the following reasons: (1) Applicant failed to go to
his appointed place of duty at the proper time on more than one occasion, (2) Applicant
failed to properly maintain his Government quarters on more than one occasion, (3)
Applicant issued several checks knowing there were insufficient funds, (4) Applicant
made false statements about his financial condition, and (5) Applicant failed to inform his
supervisor about his financial condition. Despite multiple letters of reprimand and
attempts at counseling and rehabilitation, Applicant’s Commanding Officer wrote that
Applicant’s conduct did not improve. His discharge was for “A pattern of Misconduct,
Conduct Prejudicial to Good Order and Discipline” (Exhibits 11 - 19). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
6
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has been
unable to pay his obligations for a considerable period of time. The evidence is sufficient
to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
 Since Applicant has not resolved most of his very significant debt, I do not find
that any Mitigating Condition (MC) is applicable. I conclude that until he is able to
significantly reduce this debt, and establish a more stable financial picture, he has not
mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E,  I conclude that AG 15 ¶ DC (d) “credible adverse
information . . . which, when combined with all information supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
the person may not properly safeguard protected information” is applicable to Applicant. I
do not find that any MC applies under this Guideline.  I therefore, resolve Guideline E
against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and why no Mitigating Condition applies
under Guidelines F and E, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
        Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c. through 1.q.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.s. through 1.w.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b., 1.r., and 1.x.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a .: Against Applicant
Conclusion
       In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
