 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08260 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on February 27, 2008. On or before April 27, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct; Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology Systems; and Guideline D, Sexual Behavior. (The SOR was 
undated. The memorandum forwarding the SOR to Applicant is dated April 27, 2009, 
and is used to estimate the date when the SOR was issued.)  The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 26, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 15, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2009. On August 3, 2009, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 26, 2009. The case was heard on that 
date. The government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4. Applicant testified and submitted no documents. The transcript 
was received on September 10, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
2.a.  He denies the remaining SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old software engineer for a Department of Defense 
contractor who seeks to maintain his security clearance. He has been employed in his 
current position since November 2007. He has held a security clearance since March 
2003. He is a high school graduate and has taken some college courses. He is single 
and has two daughters, ages 17 and 10. (Tr at 5-6; Gov 1)  
 
From August 2005 to March 2007, Applicant worked as a network technician for 
another defense contractor located in another state. He applied for and was granted a 
security clearance for the first time in this job. When he first started working for the 
defense contractor, Applicant occasionally accessed the internet to use his personal e-
mail accounts during work hours. He admits that he responded to e-mails from dating 
and adult sites that he had joined. He insists the adult sites did not contain pornography. 
He also received SPAM e-mails that contained pornographic sites. A work computer 
scan revealed that Applicant had been accessing the internet for personal reasons. On 
September 29, 2005, Applicant’s supervisor verbally counseled him for unacceptable 
internet use. The usage logs indicated Applicant used the internet for unacceptable 
reasons on September 18, 2005, September 28, 2005, and September 29, 2005. The 
specific unacceptable reasons were not described. (Tr at 17-18, 33-41; Gov 4 at 2; 
Response to SOR, dated May 26, 2009) 
 
On June 20, 2006, Applicant received a warning letter for inappropriate internet 
use. The letter does not provide the specific details of the unacceptable internet use 
other than Applicant was using customer-provided resources to access the internet for 
personal use. The customer complained about Applicant’s excessive and unacceptable 
internet usage on February 15, 2006, May 1, 2006, and June 14, 2006.   The warning 
letter stated that Applicant violated the company’s Network Systems Policies: PS-ISS-
150 Acceptable Use Policy, Business Practice Council Guideline Use of Electronic 
Communications, and Section 406 Performance Improvement Policy – Section 2, 
specifically: 
 
2.21 Violating customer/contract compliance and business ethics policies. 
 
2.23 Engaging in conduct which causes embarrassment to the company 
or potentially disparages its image.  
 
 Applicant was warned that the excessive amount of time spent on the internet 
was not warranted, and reflected negatively on his overall performance and the 
 
3 
 
 
company. He was warned that future occurrences would result in further disciplinary 
action up to and including termination of employment. The warning letter was placed in 
Applicant’s file for one year. During that time, he was not eligible to receive a merit 
increase or to participate in recognition programs. (Gov 4) 
 
 Applicant admits that he received this warning letter but denies the inappropriate 
internet usage at work included accessing sites related to dating and pornography as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. He admits to accessing the internet while at work to check 
basketball scores. Nothing in the record evidence indicates the basis for the warning 
letter was Applicant accessing web-sites for dating or pornography while at work. (Tr at 
18 – 20, 41; Response to SOR, dated May 26, 2009)  
 
 On March 21, 2007, Applicant was contacted by an investigator with the local 
police department and asked to come in for questioning. He was questioned about 
solicitation of a minor over his home computer in February 2007. Applicant denies any 
knowledge of soliciting a minor over the internet. During the time period in question, he 
allowed an acquaintance in his apartment complex to use his computer on occasion. 
The computer was his personal lap top and was not a government computer.  On the 
day he was called in for questioning, the local police department obtained a search 
warrant and seized Applicant’s personal lap top, equipment, and several disks. After he 
was questioned, Applicant was free to leave. He was not arrested or charged with any 
offense. (Tr at 21-23, 43-47; Gov 2; Gov 1, section 22; Gov 3; Response to SOR)  
 
 On March 23, 2007, Applicant’s manager called him on his day off.  His manager 
told him that someone from the local police department contacted the office and told 
them that Applicant was arrested on March 21, 2007, for soliciting a minor over the 
internet. Applicant said he was willing to come in to work to discuss the matter. He told 
his manager that he was called in for questioning by police but not arrested. He denied 
soliciting a minor over the internet. Applicant was placed on administrative leave 
because the customer did not want publicity. On March 27, 2007, Applicant was asked 
to resign. He resigned because he believed that he had no choice but to resign or be 
fired. In April, the police department returned his computer and equipment to him. He 
was never charged with an offense and never provided any documentation about the 
incident. (Tr at 24 – 26, 47; Gov 2; Gov 3; Response to SOR)  
 
 From March 2007 to November 2007, Applicant was unemployed. He lost his 
apartment and everything in it. He moved back to his home state and was hired by his 
current employer in November 2007. On February 27, 2008, he completed his e-QIP 
application. In response to section 22: Your Employment Record, Applicant indicated 
that he left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct with regards 
to his previous employer. He provided a detailed explanation of the circumstances that 
led to his resignation. (Gov 1, Sec 22)   
 
Applicant has worked for his current employer without incident. Aside from when 
he was called in for questioning in March 2007, he has had no other involvement with 
law enforcement. (Tr at 51)   
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are still required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) potentially 
apply to the facts of this case: 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information) 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is 
not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach 
of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or 
other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations); (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or 
resources) 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(c ) and ¶ 16(d) apply with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  Applicant 
was verbally counseled in September 2005 for unacceptable internet use by his 
employer. He admits that he used his work computer for personal use and accessed 
dating  and adult web-sites during duty hours. He denies accessing pornographic web-
sites but claims pornographic web-sites were sent as SPAM e-mail.  Although he was 
warned to restrict his internet use at work for business purposes only, he received a 
written warning for inappropriate use of a business computer between February 2006 to 
June 2006. The specifics describing the inappropriate use were not provided in the 
record evidence. Applicant admits to checking basketball scores while at work. He feels 
 
6 
 
 
that he was singled out because other co-workers were doing the same thing. There is 
no record evidence to support the premise that he accessed dating and pornographic 
web-sites on these occasions.  
 
 SOR ¶1.c is found for Applicant. There is no evidence Applicant used a 
government computer while at the customer work site to solicit a minor over the internet 
as the allegation alleges. Applicant admits he was questioned by police about the use of 
his home computer to solicit a minor over the internet while at home. He denies the 
allegation. He cooperated with law enforcement when called in for questioning. His 
computer, computer equipment, and computer disks were seized pursuant to a search 
warrant. Nothing illicit was found on his computer or computer disks. He was not 
arrested. Applicant claims he let an acquaintance in his apartment complex use his 
computer during the same timeframe that the alleged solicitation occurred. (Note: The 
file contains no evidence pertaining to the alleged solicitation which was the basis for 
calling in Applicant for questioning.) The record evidence contains no information from 
independent sources or law enforcement that contradict Applicant’s testimony. No 
witnesses were called to establish the alleged offense. Applicant fully disclosed the 
incident when he completed his e-QIP application in February 2008.  In fact, he is the 
only source in the record evidence describing this incident.  Being called in for 
questioning does not mean an individual committed the offense. There is insufficient 
evidence to establish that Applicant solicited a minor over the internet on his home 
computer.  
 
 A prima facie case is found with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. Applicant was 
questioned by the local police department in March 2007 regarding accessing the 
internet from his personal computer for the purposes of soliciting a minor. He was 
subsequently placed on administrative leave and eventually asked to resign.  However, 
the record evidence does not establish Applicant committed the offense that the police 
questioned him about.  
 
 The security concerns raised under personal conduct are mitigated. I find the 
following Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c ) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17 (d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) 
 
 While Applicant was counseled on two occasions for misuse of his work 
computer in 2005 and 2006, he has not repeated the conduct since that time. He has 
been employed since November 2007 with his current employer and has no issues 
 
7 
 
 
regarding inappropriate use of his work computer. While Applicant was called in for 
questioning about soliciting a minor on his personal computer, he was never arrested or 
charged with a crime. He denies the allegation and there is no record evidence that 
contradicts his testimony. In fact, all of the government’s evidence consists of testimony 
provided by Applicant. The allegations caused Applicant to lose his job. He resigned but 
felt he had no alternative. The circumstances are such that it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness. Considering all that Applicant has been 
through, he is unlikely to repeat such conduct.   
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information 
Technology Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39 which states,  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions apply under Guideline M (M DC) in 
Applicant’s case with respect to SOR ¶¶1.a, and 1.b: 
 
 M DC ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system) 
  
 While Applicant believes he was singled out for punishment for his second 
offense when he received the written warning letter, he admits that he violated company 
policies pertaining to internet use while at work. The warning letter Applicant received 
stated the specific company policies Applicant violated pertaining to computer use. 
  
 The issues pertaining to Use of Information Technology Systems can be 
mitigated (M MC). M MC ¶ 41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies to Applicant’s case.  More than three years have passed since this 
incident. Since that time, Applicant has not been involved in any similar incidents. 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline M concern.  
 
 The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e are not relevant to the Guideline M  
allegation because they ultimately did not involve the use of a work computer and did 
not occur in the work place.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern raised under the Sexual Behavior guideline is set forth in 
¶12 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 The government did not establish its case with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c for the 
reasons discussed above under personal conduct. The government did not establish its 
case with respect to SOR ¶ 1.b because there is no evidence that Applicant’s 
inappropriate internet usage at work between February 2006 to June 2006 included 
accessing web-sites related to dating and pornography. Applicant admits to accessing 
adult and dating web-sites on his work computer when he was verbally counseled in 
September 2005 which is the basis of SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 With respect to SOR ¶ 1.a, the following disqualifying condition is relevant to 
Applicant’s case: 
  
 Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Condition ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public 
nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment). Accessing adult sites at the 
workplace indicates a lack of judgment on Applicant’s part.   
 
 Concerns raised under Sexual Behavior can be mitigated. The following 
mitigating conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case. Sexual Behavior Mitigating 
Condition ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. More than four 
years have passed since Applicant was warned about the inappropriate use of his work 
computer. There is no evidence that he used his work computer to access adult web-
sites and pornography on the internet since September 2005.  The conduct was not 
recent and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.    
 
 Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under sexual behavior.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant was counseled by 
his previous employer on two occasions for inappropriate use of company computers, 
specifically for accessing the internet for personal reasons, he has not repeated such 
conduct in over three years. While he was questioned by police about soliciting a minor 
on his personal computer, he denies the allegation. The government did not prove this 
controverted allegation by substantial evidence. Applicant was never arrested or 
charged with any offense. Nothing illicit was found on his computer after it was seized 
pursuant to a search warrant. While Applicant resigned when asked to do so after his 
company learned that he was questioned by police, he felt he had no alternative but to 
resign. He has successfully worked in his current position since November 2007. 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under Personal Conduct, Use of 
Information Technology Systems, and Sexual Behavior.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
