                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09431 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 13, 2009 and did not request a 
hearing. On June 17, 2009, Department Counsel requested a hearing in the case before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 27, 2009. DOHA issued 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
a Notice of Hearing on August 6, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
September 23, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not 
object and they were admitted. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A which was admitted 
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf. The record was held 
open until September 30, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. 
None were submitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 
30, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and works as a multi-media specialist. He has worked 
for a federal contractor since 1998, and has never held a security clearance. He 
graduated from high school in 1996. He is not married.1  
 
 Applicant began using marijuana in January 1994. He used marijuana 
approximately monthly from 1994 to 1996. He used it approximately five times a week 
from 1997 to 2001. He used it approximately three times a week from 2001 to 
November 2002. He used it approximately once a month, or less, from December 2002 
to August 2007. From August 2007 to August 2008, he used it approximately six to 
twelve times during the year. From August 2008 to September 2009, Applicant used 
marijuana about six to twelve times during the year. His last use of marijuana was while 
camping with his friends, two weeks before his hearing.2 
 
 Applicant stated he knew drug use was illegal and he knows there is a prohibition 
of drug use by government contractors. He stated he imagined it was against his 
company’s policy too. He does not use drugs at his home, because his girlfriend, who 
lives with him, has a seven-year-old daughter and he does not want to expose her to 
drugs. His girlfriend does not use marijuana.3 
 
 Applicant indicated that his future use of marijuana was dependant upon whether 
he was granted a security clearance. If he was granted a security clearance, he would 
abstain. He stated “I would stop, if I [was] to possess a clearance, I would stop, because 
I would not want to jeopardize my clearance.”4 He went on to say “It would all depend 
on my clearance.”5 Regarding his general intention to use marijuana in the future he 
stated he may use it at a party, if it is available. He explained that his use of marijuana 
1 Tr. 19-20, 22. 
 
2 Tr. 24-32. 
 
3 Tr. 31-34. 
 
4 Tr. 32. 
 
5 Tr. 33. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
is not an everyday occurrence. If he was in the right environment, he could see himself 
using it again. He could not definitively confirm whether he would use it in the future.6  
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana, two weeks ago, was with his “life-long friends.”7 
He associates with these friends a couple of times a week. He stated he was with “his 
buddies” and was “hanging out”, “having some beers”, and “having a good time,” when 
they used it. He admitted his friends use marijuana on occasion.8  
 
 Applicant admitted that he has purchased marijuana in the past and then 
provided it to a friend. He stated in the past he has “picked up” marijuana for a friend. 
He did not profit from the purchase and transfer of marijuana to his friend. He admitted 
he had operated a vehicle after using marijuana. He believes marijuana should be 
legalized.9  
 
 Applicant stated he has used marijuana when he was working at a second job, 
but not before going to work at his primary job with the federal contractor.10  
 
 Applicant experimented with other illegal drugs in the past. Between 1995 and 
1998, he snorted cocaine once. He snorted heroine once after he completed high 
school. He also has used prescription drugs that were not prescribed to him, such as 
Percocet. He estimated that he last used the prescription drug two to three years ago, 
and he used it about 12 times. It was given to him by friends.11  
 
 Applicant stated when he completed his security clearance application (SCA) he 
completed the question on the application that asked about his past drug use. He 
thought perhaps his drug use would prohibit him from obtaining a security clearance. 
When he was interviewed in August 2008, he also became aware that drug use might 
be an issue.12 
 
 Applicant is aware that drug use is illegal, but considers it similar to speeding. He 
does not feel his use of marijuana would ever be used to compromise him and it never 
prevented him from doing a good job. He stated he is able to function under stress and 
is a good problem-solver. He believes his employer is aware of his drug use. Some 
people at work and those that work in the security division advised him that he should 
6 Tr. 32-34, 44. 
 
7 Tr. 46. 
 
8 Tr. 31, 46-47. 
 
9 Tr. 35-38. 
 
10 Tr. 38-40. 
 
11 Tr. 35-36, 40-44; I have not considered for disqualifying purposes Applicant’s other illegal drug 
use that was not alleged, but have considered it when analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
12 Tr. 20-24, 47-50. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
stop using drugs. He believes the main problem with his drug use is if were to be 
stopped by the police with marijuana in his possession.13  
 
 Applicant has participated in drug rehabilitation and does not believe he is 
addicted to marijuana. He does not consider his drug use a problem. He believes drug 
use is common and he only knows a “handful of people”14 that have never used 
marijuana. He considers himself a man of high integrity. He understands he has no 
excuse for breaking the law. He is dedicated to his craft and describes himself as 
focused on pride, honor and integrity. He pays his bill on time. He owns his own house, 
truck, and motorcycle. He emphasized that he answered all of the drug questions on his 
SCA honestly, explaining his past drug use.15  
 
 A character witness, who testified on behalf of Applicant, has known him for nine 
to ten years. At one time he was Applicant’s supervisor. He holds a security clearance 
and trusts Applicant. He does not believe Applicant can be coerced into doing anything 
he does not want to do. He believes Applicant is honest. He was aware of Applicant’s 
drug use in the past, but was unaware of the extent of it. He confirmed that illegal drug 
use is a violation of their employer’s policy. He has not observed Applicant use illegal 
drugs.16 A character letter Applicant provided stated that he has demonstrated an ability 
to be placed in positions of trust and responsibility. He is considered a great problem-
solver. He is also a valued and trusted asset who has the ability to secure confidential 
information.17  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
13 Tr. 47-52. 
 
14  Tr. 55. 
 
15 Tr. 55-63. 
 
16 Tr. 67-75. 
 
17 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs from 1994 through September 2009, and most 
recently two weeks before his hearing. He has purchased illegal drugs in the past for his 
own use and for others. He may use illegal drugs in the future, depending on the 
circumstances of his environment. He will not use illegal drugs if he is granted a security 
clearance. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant has used marijuana, an illegal substance, from 1994 through 
September 2009. His last use was with “life-long friends.” He continues to associate 
with friends who use illegal drugs. He stated that his continuance of drug use is 
contingent upon obtaining a security clearance He has shown an unwillingness to abide 
by the law. His illegal drug use is recent and frequent, and based on his admissions, 
likely to recur. He has not demonstrated an intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
He has not abstained from illegal drug use and did not offer a signed statement of his 
intention to refrain from drug use, subject to automatic revocation of a clearance for any 
violation. The burden shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns raised by his 
illegal drug use. He did not provide sufficient evidence meet his burden. Applicant’s 
drug use casts doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
find mitigating conditions (a) and (b) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant used marijuana two weeks prior to his hearing and after he had 
submitted a SCA. I find that his behavior and conduct demonstrate questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. I find that the above disqualifying condition applies. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17, and especially considered the following: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 When Applicant submitted a SCA, he was aware that drug abuse was a security 
concern. Despite that knowledge, he continued to use illegal drugs while his SCA was 
pending. I find that his behavior casts doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Therefore, I find that mitigating condition (c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s former supervisor and 
coworker consider him honest and trustworthy. Applicant has a long history of illegal 
drug use. He continued to use illegal drugs after he completed his SCA and two weeks 
prior to his hearing, which shows poor judgment. He has not demonstrated an intent not 
to use illegal drugs in the future nor has he disassociated himself from those with whom 
he uses drugs. I find the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d is redundant with ¶ 1.a and 2.a.Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Drug Involvement and 
Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
