 As defined in Appendix 10 of DoD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended.1
 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ADP Case No. 08-09734
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a public trust position is denied.
On September 10, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust
Positions (SF-85P) to request eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  involving access to1
sensitive information as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant two sets of
interrogatories  regarding potentially adverse information in her background. Based on2
the results of the background investigation and her responses to the interrogatories,
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.3
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on4
December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, these guidelines take precedence over the guidelines contained in Enclosure
2 to the Directive.
 Identified in the transcript at page 26.5
2
DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is3
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On March 27,
2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under4
Guidelines E (personal conduct), F (financial considerations), and J (criminal conduct).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on June 18, 2009. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on July 6,
2009, I convened a hearing on July 30, 2009, at which the parties appeared as
scheduled. The government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 - 5). Applicant testified in her
own behalf, and she proffered five documents admitted collectively as Applicant’s
Exhibit (Ax.) A.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2009. I left the record5
open after the hearing to allow Applicant time to submit additional relevant information.
The record closed on August 17, 2009, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing
submission via Department Counsel. It has been admitted without objection as Ax. B.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged Applicant owed approximately
$24,695 for six delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.f) referred for collection between
February 2003 and December 2008. It was also alleged that, in March 2002, she was
charged with conspiracy to commit bank fraud, was placed in a 12-month pre-trial
diversion program, and ordered to pay restitution (SOR ¶ 1.g). In response, Applicant
admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g. She also admitted SOR ¶ 1.f, but
provided information with her answer showing she had paid that debt in February 2009.
Applicant admitted she was aware of the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and ¶¶ 1.c - 1.e,
but denied she is responsible for those debts. (Tr. 12 - 14)
Under Guideline J, the government cross-alleged as criminal conduct, Applicant’s
2002 arrest for conspiracy to commit bank fraud (SOR ¶2.a). Applicant admitted to this
allegation as well. She further stated that she complied “with all laws and regulations
given which lead [sic] to early termination” of her pre-trial diversion. 
Under Guideline E, the government alleged that, by answering “no” to SF-85P
question 12 (Employment Record), she deliberately omitted the fact that she was fired
from a job in 2003 (SOR ¶ 3.a). The government also alleged that, by answering “no” to
SF-85P question 22 (Debts more than 180 days past due), she deliberately omitted the
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was not delinquent at the time she completed the SF-85P.6
3
fact that she was delinquent on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e (SOR ¶ 3.b).6
Applicant denied both SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b. As to SOR ¶ 3.a, she averred that all of the
jobs she held in 2003 were either temporary or ended when the employer downsized.
As to SOR ¶ 3.b, she claimed her omission of her debts was an oversight. In addition to
the facts admitted through her response to the SOR, I make the following findings of
fact based on my review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits.
Applicant is a 33-year-old single mother of two (ages 10 and 14), who works as a
Beneficiary Service Representative for a large healthcare and medical insurance
company contracted to manage medical insurance claims and information for
TRICARE, the Department of Defense (DoD) medical insurance system for military
personnel and their families. She has held her current position since September 2007.
She was unemployed between April 2007 and September 2007, after having worked in
a similar capacity for a different medical benefits firm for two years. Since November
2003, her only other period of unemployment was in December 2004 and January 2005.
(Gx. 1) 
Applicant is studying for her Associate’s degree in Health Administration, which
she expects to obtain in May 2010. Her work performance with her current employer
has been exemplary. As recently as June 2009, she received a Letter of Appreciation
from the commanding officer of the facility where she works. A co-worker lauds
Applicant for her reliability, dedication, honesty, and integrity. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Tr. 37 - 38)
Applicant claimed that the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e are not her
responsibility, as they were the result of fraud. She explained that she was twice the
victim of identity theft, first through a theft of her purse and credit cards while she was
riding public transportation, then through a burglary of her father’s house while Applicant
was living there. Applicant claimed she had police reports and other records to
corroborate this claim, but has not produced that information despite being given extra
time after the hearing. (Answer to SOR; Ax. B; Tr. 39 - 45, 61 - 64) She claimed the
debts were due to be removed from her credit history. These debts appeared on the first
credit report obtained in Applicant’s background investigation (Gx. 5) and in a
December 2008 credit report Applicant provided in response to DOHA interrogatories
(Gx. 3). However, they do not appear in an October 2008 credit report obtained by
DOHA adjudicators (Gx. 4). That report also reflects fraud alerts reported in September
and November 2007.
Applicant owes approximately $8,352 for the balance due on a loan for a used
car she bought in February 2002 (SOR 1.b). She was able to pay this note for about 18
months, but defaulted on the loan when she was terminated from her job in 2003 after
her arrest for conspiracy to commit bank fraud. Also contributing to her inability to pay
her car note was the death of her father around the same time, which left her with
funeral expenses and the obligation to make his mortgage payments. Applicant still has
possession of the car, which is no longer operable, but she cannot get clear title until
she resolves the remainder of the car note. (Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 46 - 48)
4
Applicant also owes about $5,869 for another delinquent car loan (SOR ¶ 1.c). In
late 2001, she traded in a car she originally bought in October 1998. The terms of her
purchase required her to pay $1,000 down and add the balance due on the trade-in to
the financing for the new car. About two or three months later, Applicant was told she
had to return the new car because there were irregularities (not otherwise specified) in
the way the dealer had handled the title (it was a used car). Applicant was refunded her
$1,000 down payment, but the trade-in was not returned. Her understanding at the time
was that the loan for the trade-in had been satisfied with the financing of the new car.
This debt appears only on the first credit report obtained during her investigation. (Gx. 2
- 5; Tr. 49 - 55)
Applicant paid the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.f in February 2009. (Answer to SOR)
This debt was apparently related to a tax payment deficiency. She borrowed against an
anticipated tax refund, but the actual refund was less than what she borrowed. (Tr. 64 -
66) The debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.d is for an unpaid medical bill for the treatment of one of
her children at an emergency room around 2003. Applicant insists she had medical
insurance at the time that should have covered the bill. She has been aware of this debt
since 2003, but has been unable to verify the status of this debt, which still appears on
her credit report as of December 2008. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 56 - 61)
In 2000, Applicant was at a family reunion at a location which was about eight
hours away by car to the north of where she lives. At some point during the reunion,
Applicant and two distant cousins drove to another city about 110 miles farther north,
where one of the cousins went into a bank and cashed a fraudulent check for $29,000.
Applicant later received a $1,100 check from one of the cousins. 
In testifying about this event, Applicant has claimed (1) that she did not know that
they had actually gone to another state when the relative went into the bank; (2) that
she did not know what the relative was doing; (3) that, although she grew up with one of
the relatives, she did not know her real name until the FBI started investigating the bank
fraud scheme; and (4) that she was only joking when she told her relative that she could
use some money. (Tr. 66 - 72, 75 - 76) As alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 2.a, Applicant was
arrested and charged with conspiracy to commit bank fraud in March 2002. She
completed a pre-trial diversion program and made restitution. On completion of the pre-
trial diversion program in May 2004, the charge was dismissed. (Gx. 2)
After she was arrested, Applicant was required to travel several times to the city
where her relative had cashed the check. Applicant lost her job as a result of having to
be gone frequently, but she insists she left the job by mutual agreement with her
employer. (Tr. 72 - 75) On November 16, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a
government investigator during her background investigation. She stated during the
interview that she could not make payments on a car note (SOR ¶ 1.b), because “she
was terminated from her employment due to required travel...relative to [her] federal
arrest...” (Gx. 2) 
When Applicant submitted her SF-85P, she listed her federal arrest, but she did
not disclose that she was terminated from her job after she was arrested (SOR ¶ 3.a) or
that she owed any of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR (SOR ¶ 3.b). As to her
 Directive. 6.3.7
5
negative answer to SF-85P question 12, Applicant claimed she left her job by mutual
agreement with her employer, because of frequent travel required in connection with her
arrest. Question 12 asked if, in the previous seven years, Applicant had been fired, quit
after being told she would be fired, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations
of misconduct or following allegations of unsatisfactory performance, or for other
reasons under unfavorable circumstances. (Gx. 1)
As to her negative answer to SF-85P question 22, Applicant asserted she was
focused on the disclosure of her arrest and forgot to list her debts. (Answer to SOR) At
the time she completed the SF-85P, Applicant was aware she had delinquent debts
within the meaning of question 22. (Tr. 78 - 79) That question asked whether, in the
previous seven years, Applicant had any debts more than 180 days past due, or
whether she was currently more than 90 days past due on any debt(s). She explained at
the hearing that she “failed to mark [the questions] on the form. I missed them.” (Tr. 79) 
However, the SF-85P submitted as Gx. 1 was completed by hand. At questions
12 and 22, as with several other questions, Applicant took the time to put an “X” in the
“No” box, and she entered “N/A” in boxes for entering details of an affirmative response.
In response to Department Counsel’s cross-examination, Applicant offered that,
because she disclosed her 2002 federal conspiracy charge, she had nothing to gain by
withholding other adverse information. (Tr. 79 - 80)
Other than the tax-related debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant has not paid or
taken other steps to resolve any of her debts. She makes about $2,000 net each month,
which she estimates leaves her about $100 after monthly expenses. (Tr. 89 - 92) After
she was hired for her current job in 2007, Applicant contacted a financial counseling and
debt management company. But she has not actually enrolled in any debt repayment
program or received any financial management counseling. (Tr. 92 - 93)
I was able to assess Applicant’s demeanor and her credibility at the hearing. I did
not find credible her explanations of the circumstances which led to her arrest for
conspiracy to commit bank fraud. For example, it is implausible that she would grow up
with a relative but not know her name, or that she did not know where she and her
cousins were going the day the $29,000 check was cashed. I also did not believe her
explanation of the car financing transaction that resulted in the debt at SOR ¶ 1.c. Her
failure to document such an unusual circumstance further undercuts her credibility.
Policies
Each trustworthiness decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors7
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
6
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to sensitive
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline E (personal conduct), at AG ¶ 15, Guideline F (financial considerations), at
AG ¶ 18, and Guideline J (criminal conduct), at AG ¶ 30.
A trustworthiness determination is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to8
have access to automated sensitive information. The government bears the initial
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to
deny or revoke a position of trust for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be
able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden,
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. A
person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
 Directive, E3.1.14.10
7
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
By admitting to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g, the government was relieved of its burden of
proving those allegations as fact. By denying ¶ 1.a and ¶¶ 1.c - 1.e, the burden
remained with the government to prove those allegations.  The record evidence (the10
government’s exhibits, Applicant’s various SOR admissions, and her testimony at the
hearing) is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts established show
that Applicant accrued significant delinquent debt between February 2003 and
December 2008. All of the debts, except for the tax-related debt at SOR ¶ 1.f, remain
unresolved and Applicant is not able to resolve her debts given her current financial
condition. Available information also shows that Applicant participated in a conspiracy to
commit bank fraud, from which she personally profited. The foregoing requires
application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶
19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft,
check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan
statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust).
In response to the government’s information, Applicant has claimed that all of her
debts arose due to unforeseen events, such as unemployment, a death in the family,
insurance mistake, theft, and fraud. However, despite being given ample opportunity to
produce information that would support what are essentially affirmative defenses to the
government’s information, she has not provided anything that supports her claims. As to
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, the record warrants consideration of the mitigating condition
at AG ¶ 20 (b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) as it pertains to her father’s passing and her brief
period of unemployment in 2003. However, Applicant’s loss of that job was due to her
criminal conduct. Further, there is no information showing she has acted responsibly in
the face of her delinquent debts regardless of the cause. Because all but one of her
debts remain unresolved, because she has not acted on her intentions to seek financial
counseling, because she has not documented her claimed disputes of debts in her
credit history, and because her current finances are not sufficient to resolve her debts,
none of the other mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 apply. Applicant has failed to
meet her burden of persuasion in response to the adverse information about her
finances.
Personal Conduct
Applicant denied the allegations that she deliberately falsified her SF-85P when
she omitted the fact that she was terminated from her job after she was arrested in
2002, and omitted the fact she is more than 180 days past due on debts over the past
seven years. However, the government’s information (Gx. 1, Gx. 2, Applicant’s
8
response to the SOR, and her testimony) was sufficient to support the SOR allegations
about her personal conduct. As stated at AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The summary of Applicant’s November 16, 2007, subject interview represents
that she told the government investigator she was terminated from her job due to her
2002 arrest for conspiracy to commit bank fraud. Applicant was presented with the
summary before her hearing and had the opportunity to correct the summary. She
acknowledged that the summary was accurate. She testified that she and her employer
at the time of her arrest agreed she should leave her job given the requirement she
travel frequently in response to her arrest. I do not accept Applicant’s benign
characterization of what happened, as she was obligated to disclose her termination
because of the associated allegation of wrongdoing. 
As to her omission of her debts, there is no question she was aware of her debts
at the time she completed the SF-85P. However, Applicant’s claim that she overlooked
this part of her SF-85P makes no sense in view of the fact that she handwrote her
responses and decided to enter “N/A” in parts of the form. The fact that she disclosed
her arrest did not relieve her of the basic obligation to fully and accurately disclose all
relevant information in her background. All of the information bearing on SOR ¶¶ 3.a
and 3.b supports a conclusion that Applicant intentionally withheld the information in
question. Accordingly, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies. By contrast,
Applicant’s lack of credibility at the hearing, precludes application of any of the available
mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17. On balance, Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns raised by her deliberate omissions from her SF-85P.
Criminal Conduct
Applicant admitted the allegation that she was arrested in 2002 on federal
charges of conspiracy to commit bank fraud. This information raises a security concern,
addressed in AG ¶ 30; that is, criminal conduct “creates doubt about a person's
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” More
specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 31(c)
(allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).
 See footnote 7, supra.11
 See footnote 9, supra. 12
9
By contrast, Applicant’s arrest is not recent and she has not been involved in any
such conduct since then. This requires consideration of the mitigating conditions at AG
¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and AG ¶ 32(d)
(there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement).
However, the passage of time without further adverse conduct is not sufficient
here. In assessing the applicability of the mitigating conditions, I have considered
Applicant’s lack of credibility in discussing the events surrounding her arrest, as well as
her deliberate falsification of her SF-85P. These aspects of her conduct preclude a
conclusion that she is not likely to disregard laws or regulations in the future, that she is
successfully rehabilitated, or that her past conduct does not currently cast doubt on her
judgment and reliability. On balance, I conclude she has not mitigated the security
concerns about her past criminal conduct.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E, F, and J. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a
33-year-old single mother of two and is presumed to be a mature responsible adult. She
is a reliable worker and has been recognized for her work in support of the military’s
health care system. However, the favorable information in her background is insufficient
to overcome the security concerns about her lengthy history of bad debt, her criminal
conduct, and her deliberate falsification of her SF-85P. These facts and circumstances
present an unacceptable risk were she to be granted access to sensitive information. A
fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information about the Applicant’s11
background shows there are still doubts about her ability or willingness to protect the
government’s interests as her own. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved for the government.12
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
10
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3: Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
