 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08098 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin M. Sherlock, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Preference concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C, Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 28, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 16, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 5, 2009. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 13, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iran. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. The 
request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included 
in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are set out in 
the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two witnesses, and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through U, which were received without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted three 
documents, which were marked AE V through X and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE II. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is applying for 
his first security clearance. He is single and has no children. He was born in Kuwait. His 
parents were Iranian citizens living in Kuwait. Applicant has never lived in Iran, but as a 
child he would visit Iran with his family during his summer vacations. He attended an 
Iranian school in Kuwait until he was 11 years old, at which time he entered an English 
language school. English became his primary language. He cannot read or write Farsi 
and is not fluent speaking the language.1  
 
 Applicant’s parents brought him and his four siblings to the United States in the 
late 1980s. One of his siblings required medical attention for a rare genetic disorder. His 
father returned to Kuwait to attend to his business, but the rest of the family remained in 
the U.S. Applicant was enrolled in high school. He graduated high school with a high 
grade point average and numerous awards. He attended community college before 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22-26, 32, 35-39, 71, 73, 107-109, 140; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, B. 
 
 
3 
 
transferring to a four-year university. He graduated with honors and obtained his 
bachelor’s degree.2  
 
 Applicant’s father was openly critical of the Iranian government. When Iraq 
invaded Kuwait in 1990, he went to Iran to avoid the Iraqi army. Because of his political 
opinions and outspoken criticism of the Iranian government, he was detained and 
incarcerated in Iran. His family lost touch with him for several years. His business in 
Kuwait was looted and destroyed by the Iraqi army. Applicant has had very limited 
contact with his father since Applicant came to live in the U.S.3 
 
 Applicant and the remainder of his family applied for political asylum in the U.S. 
in the early 1990s. They were denied asylum but were granted permanent resident 
status. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2006, and received a U.S. passport shortly 
thereafter.4 
 
 Applicant’s four siblings are all U.S. citizens and residents. His mother is also a 
U.S. citizen. As discussed below, U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of 
Iranian citizens are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities. Under Iranian law, 
Applicant, his mother, and his siblings are considered Iranian citizens. All of his siblings 
are college graduates living in the same state as Applicant. Two of his siblings are 
married to U.S. citizens. One of his married siblings has a child who was born in the 
U.S.5 
 
 Applicant traveled to Kuwait in 2007. His mother met him in Kuwait a few weeks 
later. Applicant met his father in Kuwait by happenstance. His father divides his time 
living in Kuwait and Iran. His father was living in a house that required a lot of repairs. 
Applicant, although not close to his father, worked on his father’s house for about three 
months. Applicant paid for many of the repairs on the house.6   
 
 After several months in Kuwait, Applicant traveled with his mother to Iran to visit 
extended family, sightsee, and for his mother to check on the status of her assets in 
Iran. He used his Iranian passport to enter Iran. Upon entry to Iran, Applicant was 
required to complete paperwork to establish his exemption from Iranian military service. 
While in Iran, Applicant was informed that his entry/exit permit had expired. He was 
unaware before then that he needed an entry/exit permit before he could depart Iran. 
He was told that he could obtain a one-way temporary permit to leave Iran if he filed the 
appropriate application forms. The application required his military exemption card and 
his Iranian passport. When he submitted his application, he was informed that his 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 26-35, 40-41, 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE C-H. 
 
3 Tr. at 23, 111-113, 131; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 32-34, 113, 132-134; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE I. 
 
5 Tr. at 42-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 61-70, 96-97, 109-110, 113-118, 126; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE P. 
 
 
4 
 
Iranian passport needed to be replaced with a new passport. He applied for and 
received a new Iranian passport.7  
 
 Applicant and his mother stayed at his mother’s house while they were in Iran. 
His cousin, who is a citizen and resident of Iran, stayed with them while they were in 
Iran. Applicant and his mother left Iran for about two weeks to visit another country and 
then returned to Iran. Their total time in Iran was about five months. Their stay in Iran 
was extended to attend a wedding of a cousin and a funeral of a distant relative. 
Applicant was briefed and debriefed by his facility security officer (FSO) before and after 
his trip.8  
 
 Applicant’s mother has been involved in an extended legal dispute with her 
brother over property in Iran. The assets in the dispute are valued at about $1,000,000. 
The brother forged some documents to essentially steal her property. Applicant saw 
some of his uncle’s actions and is a potential witness in the legal case. Applicant’s 
mother has been in Iran for more than a year working on her case. She was still in Iran 
at the close of the record, but hoped to permanently return to the U.S. as soon as 
possible.9   
 
 Applicant’s cousin has continued to assist Applicant’s mother while she is in Iran, 
with things such as driving her to see her lawyer and to get her groceries. He is 
interested in the possibility of a relationship with Applicant’s youngest sister. Applicant 
does not believe the potential relationship will develop because of the large cultural and 
language differences between his sister and his cousin.10 
 
 Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant does not have 
contact with his grandmother because she has taken his uncle’s side in the legal 
dispute with his mother.11 
 
 Applicant has other extended family members who are citizens of and residents 
in Iran. He is not close to any of them. None of Applicant’s family members have any 
direct connection to the government of Iran.12  
 
 Applicant initially indicated that he was keeping his Iranian passport so that he 
could travel to Iran to be a witness in his mother’s legal case. He decided not to keep 
the passport. The Iranian passport was given to his FSO, who destroyed it on August 5, 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 70-76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE S, U. 
 
8 Tr. at 71-72, 76, 98, 121-124, 144; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE O, T. 
 
9 Tr. at 76-93, 127-128; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE Q, R, V-X. 
 
10 Tr. at 99-104, 126-127; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
11 Tr. at 97-98, 125; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
12 Tr. at 104-106, 125-127; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
2009. Applicant has no desire to return to Iran. He is willing to renounce his Iranian 
citizenship.13 
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He has transferred a potential interest 
in a property inherited by him and his siblings to his mother. He has done well financially 
and has substantial assets in the U.S.14  
 
 Two witnesses, including the FSO and a senior executive at Applicant’s 
company, testified on his behalf. Numerous character letters and commendatory 
material were also submitted. Applicant is described as an outstanding engineer, 
honest, trustworthy, intelligent, capable, dependable, dedicated, hardworking, loyal, 
responsible, and a man of integrity. He is considered a good citizen, who is very loyal to 
the United States. He is highly recommended for a security clearance.15 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. In 2008, President Bush stated that “[t]he actions and 
policies of the Government of Iran are contrary to the interests of the United States in 
the region and pose a continuing unusual and extraordinary threat to the national 
security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.” The United States has 
defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
  
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. Iran has 
sought to make the United States suffer political, economic, and human costs. Further, 
Iran has engaged in efforts to sow violence and undermine stability in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, including lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for 
hundreds of U.S. casualties. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 81-83, 93-96, 129, 136-137, 145-155; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE U-X. 
 
14 Tr. at 59-60, 106-107, 129-131; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE N. 
 
15 Tr. at 141-160; AE J-M. 
 
 
6 
 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
7 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) applied at one point. The renewal of his Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen could 
raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Iranian 
citizenship.  
 
 
8 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Iran continued to consider Applicant an Iranian citizen after he was naturalized as 
a U.S. citizen. As such, he was required to use an Iranian passport to enter Iran. He has 
surrendered the passport to his company’s FSO, who destroyed it. To the extent that 
Iran considers him an Iranian citizen, he is willing to renounce that citizenship. AG ¶ 
11(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
 
9 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
  Applicant’s grandmother, cousin, and extended family members are citizens of 
and residents in Iran, a country that is clearly hostile to the United States.16 His father is 
a citizen of Iran and divides his time living in Kuwait and Iran. His mother is a dual 
citizen of Iran and the United States. She lives permanently in the United States, but 
has been in Iran for more than a year. Iran is considered the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism, and the government of Iran has committed numerous, serious 
human rights abuses against its people. His family members’ presence in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. Applicant’s travel to Iran and 
interaction with the government of Iran made him vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, 
and coercion by the Iranian government. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(i) have been raised by 
the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant was an Iranian citizen by birth, but he was born and raised in Kuwait. 
He has been in the United States for more than 20 years and has been a U.S. citizen 
since 2006. He is not close to his cousin and extended family in Iran. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 
and 8(c) are applicable to the security concerns related to those family members. He is 
currently estranged from his grandmother because of her siding with his uncle in the 
property dispute with his mother. The familial bonds with the uncle are almost certainly 
irrevocably severed. However, the dispute with the grandmother is more likely to be 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
10 
 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are partially applicable to the security concerns 
related to Applicant’s grandmother. 
 
 Applicant’s Iranian passport was destroyed. He is no longer vulnerable to 
exploitation, pressure, and coercion by the Iranian government because of his 2007 trip 
to Iran. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are applicable to the security concerns related to that 
trip.  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran. She has been 
in Iran for more than a year fighting an extensive legal case over more than $1,000,000 
in assets. His father is a citizen of Iran and splits his time between living in Kuwait and 
Iran. Applicant and his father have not been close in many years because of their 
separation. Applicant chose to spend three months laboring and spending his own 
money on his father’s house in Kuwait. They may not be close, but there are still some 
ties of obligation. Applicant is clearly a loyal U.S. citizen with no allegiance to the 
government of Iran. However, because of his close family ties to Iran and the nature of 
the government of Iran, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable to the security concerns related to his mother and father.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was born and raised in Kuwait to Iranian parents. He has been in the United 
States for more than 20 years and has been a U.S. citizen since 2006. He and his 
siblings have thrived in this country. He is highly regarded personally and professionally.  
 
 
11 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. Iran is the 
world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. 
Applicant’s mother is currently in Iran, and his father splits his time between Iran and 
Kuwait. Applicant is obviously an intelligent, honest, trustworthy, and loyal U.S. citizen. 
Unfortunately, through no fault of his own, he was unable to mitigate the considerable 
security concerns raised by his family in Iran. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Foreign Preference concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.d-2.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
