 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06873 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 26, 2009, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
 
2 
 
the government’s written case on July 7, 2009. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on July 17, 2009. He responded to the FORM on August 
9, 2009. Department Counsel did not object to his response. Applicant’s response to the 
FORM contained ambiguous language suggesting that he may have wanted a hearing. 
Department Counsel called and left a voice mail for Applicant and sent him a letter on 
August 28, 2009, asking him if he wanted a hearing. The case was assigned to me on 
September 2, 2009. I asked Department Counsel to verify that Applicant did not desire a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted a memorandum on September 16, 2009, 
indicating that he spoke with the Applicant, and Applicant confirmed that he did not want 
a hearing.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Applicant submitted a motion in limine objecting to the admission of certain of the 
government’s evidence. Item 4 of the FORM consists of various documents from 
another government agency regarding the agency’s determination of Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). Applicant objects on 
the grounds of hearsay and the denial of his right to confrontation. Applicant specifically 
objects to the “polygraph exam report,” as a report of investigation (ROI), and therefore 
inadmissible under the Directive. There is no evidence in the FORM of the specific 
results of a polygraph. The objection to any results of a polygraph test is sustained. 
Applicant presumably is objecting to the various reports of statements made by 
Applicant and other individuals included in the file. Applicant adopted his statements 
and their accuracy in 2005, in his response to the revocation of his access to SCI. His 
attorney stated in that response, with Applicant’s express written approval, “[t]he events 
occurred basically as reported in the report of the 23 and 24 August 2004 interviews 
and the 10 September 2004 polygraph examination; however [Applicant] denies forcing 
the teen to perform oral sex on him during a trip to [amusement park] in 1987.” When he 
responded to the SOR, Applicant provided a copy of the 2005 response to the 
revocation of his access to SCI. Applicant’s objection to the ROIs that report his 
statements to investigators is overruled, with the limitation that any indication that 
Applicant forced the teenager to perform oral sex on him during a trip to an amusement 
park in 1987 will not be considered. 
 
Applicant’s objection to the admission of the ROIs of other individuals is 
sustained. Those ROIs will not be considered in this decision. Included in the 
investigative file from the other government agency is a letter reportedly sent to 
Applicant in about 2003, by the man who Applicant allegedly had a sexual relationship 
with when the man was a teenager. Also included is a handwritten eight-page note from 
the man apparently to the Applicant. The note was provided to the agency’s investigator 
by the man’s attorney. Applicant did not specifically object to the letter and the note. The 
letter and note are accepted for the limited purpose of the fact the letter was sent and 
the note was written by the man. They are not accepted for the truth of the matters set 
forth therein. Therefore, the hearsay objection to the letter and note is overruled. 
 
 
3 
 
Included in Item 4 is the decision and supporting memorandum revoking 
Applicant’s access to SCI. The decision and memorandum are accepted for the limited 
purpose of establishing that Applicant’s access to SCI was revoked. They are not 
accepted for the truth of the facts set forth therein. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a Masters of 
Engineering degree. He has been married since 1988. He has two children, ages 19 
and 17.1  
 
 Applicant was a member of the Boy Scouts of America when he was a youth. He 
maintained his association with the Boy Scouts as an adult and served as a scout 
leader in the 1980’s. He first met one of his scouts (A) in about 1984 or 1985, when the 
boy was about 13 years old. Applicant took an interest in the boy and befriended him. 
During the period of about 1986 to 1987, Applicant became involved sexually with the 
boy. The first incident occurred on a Boy Scout camping trip in 1986, during which 
Applicant and the boy shared a tent. The boy was 15 years old at the time, and 
Applicant was about 28 years old. Between 1986, when the boy was 15, and 1987, 
when he was 16, Applicant and the boy had seven incidents involving sexual contact. 
Three of the incidents occurred when the boy was 15, and four occurred when he was 
16. Three of the incidents occurred during official scouting trips, and four occurred either 
at Applicant’s home or during trips they took with approval of the boy’s parents. The 
incidents took place in four different states. Several of the incidents occurred when 
Applicant and/or the boy had been drinking alcohol. Applicant provided A with alcohol 
on more than one of the occasions. The sexual contact involved fondling of the penis 
and fellatio on at least one occasion.2  
 
 Applicant met his wife in 1987. His friendship with A continued after he met his 
wife, but there were no further sexual incidents. He stated they remained friends, and A 
was an usher in Applicant’s wedding and babysat for his oldest child. There is no 
evidence of any inappropriate sexual acts by Applicant after his sexual relationship with 
A ended.3   
 
 Applicant received a phone call in about September 2003 from an old girlfriend of 
A. She told him that she was in possession of some letters that indicated that Applicant 
had sexually abused A. She asked to meet Applicant to discuss the letters. He told her 
that he did not want to meet and ended the phone conversation. Several days later, 
Applicant’s wife received a phone call from the same woman. She stated that Applicant 
sexually molested A when he was a Boy Scout. Applicant’s wife told the woman that it 
was a “sick lie” and not to call their house again. In about March 2004, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
 
2 Items 3-5. 
 
3 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
received an envelope in the mail containing an article about child abuse. The envelope 
did not have a return address. In about May or June 2004, Applicant received another 
envelope in the mail. This letter had A’s return address. It contained another article 
about child abuse and a short handwritten note.4     
 
 In August and September 2004, Applicant was interviewed on three occasions by 
investigators on behalf of a government agency for a determination of his eligibility for 
access to SCI. He admitted his sexual involvement with A. In about August 2004, 
Applicant told his wife about his sexual relationship with A.5 
 
 In 2005, the government agency issued a letter indicating its intent to revoke 
Applicant’s access to their Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI). 
Applicant appealed the decision and submitted a psychological evaluation by a licensed 
psychologist. The evaluation was conducted over a period of months and involved 
multiple clinical interviews, formal psychological testing, and meetings with Applicant’s 
wife.6 The psychologist found no Axis I or Axis II diagnosis. He concluded: 
 
In summary, it appears that [Applicant] has grown considerably in the 
eighteen years since the inappropriate relationship occurred. Outside of 
that incident, [Applicant] has apparently lived a clean life without any 
personal, legal, financial, occupational, psychological or behavioral 
problems. In those years he has developed an impressive personal and 
professional record while successfully holding a security clearance for 
over twenty years. 
 
Given the time that has passed, the lifestyle [Applicant] has developed 
and the maturation he has shown in his personal growth, there is very little 
likelihood that anything like this incident could ever happen again. As 
there are no psychological reasons otherwise and due to his overall 
history of stability, reliability, consistency and trustworthiness, it would 
seem more than reasonable to consider [Applicant] for continuation of his 
longstanding security clearance and professional employment.7 
 
 The decision to revoke Applicant’s access to TS/SCI was sustained by the 
agency in June 2005. Applicant appealed that decision and submitted a supplemental 
report by the licensed psychologist who conducted his evaluation. The psychologist 
reiterated his previous report. He reported that Applicant was not a pedophile and had 
never engaged in pedophilia, as A was post-pubescent during the sexual acts. The 
results of Applicant’s appeal are not in the FORM, but Applicant left employment with 
the agency in about October 2005, and indicated on his Questionnaire for National 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Id. 
 
 
5 
 
Security Positions (SF 86) submitted in March 2008, that his access to SCI was revoked 
in October 2005.8  
 
 When he submitted his response to the SOR, Applicant submitted a copy of the 
2005 appeal of his SCI revocation. There were a number of character letters attached to 
his appeal package. Co-workers and supervisors praised Applicant for his outstanding 
job performance, judgment, competence, loyalty, and reliability. There were also a 
number of letters from people who knew him from the Boy Scouts. They wrote that 
Applicant was a great husband and father; they noted his commitment and dedication to 
the Boy Scouts; and they stated how much they trusted him with their children. None of 
the letters stated that the authors were aware of Applicant’s sexual relationship with a 
scout.9   
 
 There is little in the FORM or from Applicant to indicate what has occurred since 
2005. Because Applicant did not elect a hearing, I was unable to ask him if there has 
been any further contact with A or his girlfriend. Applicant was a scout leader in 2005. 
He admitted SOR ¶ 1.e, which alleged that “[a]s of at least 2005, [Applicant was] still an 
adult leader with the Boy Scouts of America, and [his] past behavior was not known to 
current youth parents or the Boy Scouts of America professional leadership.” Nothing in 
Applicant’s response indicates that he has disassociated himself from the Boy Scouts, 
or that they are now aware of his past actions with a scout.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
                                                          
8 Items 3-6. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Id. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
7 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct with the scout could also have been alleged under the 
Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct guidelines. That behavior, when considered as a 
whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, and unwillingness to comply with rules, regulations, and the law. AG 
¶ 16(c) is applicable. That behavior and Applicant’s apparently ongoing relationship with 
the Boy Scouts also constitute personal conduct and concealment of information about 
his conduct that could create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG 
¶ 16(e) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was denied SCI access by another government 
agency in about 2005, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He was denied SCI access because of 
the information that is also alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶ 1.d does not allege distinct 
personal conduct by Applicant. It alleges the agency’s response to his conduct. That 
conduct is adequately addressed under other allegations. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 Applicant engaged in an inappropriate and criminal sexual relationship with a boy 
under his care and supervision in 1986 and 1987. He married shortly thereafter, and 
there is no evidence that this type behavior has been repeated. It has been 22 years 
since the conduct. Applicant told his wife in 2004 about his actions, which lessened, but 
 
8 
 
did not eliminate, his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Applicant is 
apparently still heavily involved as a scout leader in the Boy Scouts. I question the 
judgment of someone who would remain connected to the Boy Scouts, after betraying 
the organization and going against everything it stands for. The many letters Applicant 
submitted with the appeal of his SCI revocation do not help his case, because the 
parents of the children he was supervising clearly were unaware of Applicant’s 
inappropriate actions with a scout. I am also concerned about the efforts of A and A’s 
old girlfriend to contact Applicant and his wife in 2003 and 2004. The girlfriend’s 
motivations in contacting Applicant are unclear, but it was possibly part of an attempt to 
blackmail him.  
 
 Questions remain unanswered about this case. I find that Applicant remains 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. His actions continue to cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. With my many unanswered 
questions, I am unable to make an affirmative finding that the behavior is unlikely to 
recur. The Personal Conduct concerns are still present despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
51-year-old married father of two. He has been involved with the Boy Scouts for much 
of his life, either as a scout or a scout leader. When he was in his late 20’s, he became 
sexually involved with a teenage scout who was under his care and supervision. The 
sexual incidents occurred when the boy was 15 and 16, with a number of the incidents 
involving alcohol supplied by Applicant. The incidents occurred in four states, and 
 
9 
 
happened during official scouting trips, at Applicant’s home, or during trips they took 
with approval of the boy’s parents. Applicant crossed state lines prior to engaging in his 
illegal sexual acts with the minor. 
 
Applicant met his wife in 1987. They married in 1988. There is no evidence of 
any additional inappropriate sexual behavior by Applicant. He informed his wife of his 
actions in 2004. However, Applicant apparently is still associated with the Boy Scouts. 
The Boy Scouts and the parents of his scouts are unaware of his inappropriate sexual 
actions with a scout under his care. That in itself shows questionable judgment. He 
must know that the parents of the scouts he supervises would not have the same trust 
in him if they were aware of his past actions. The girlfriend of the boy he abused 
contacted Applicant and his wife in 2003. Her motivations for the contact are not 
completely clear, but it could have been an extortion attempt. Little is available in the 
FORM about what has occurred since 2005. I was unable to ask Applicant important 
questions about this case. Applicant’s criminal actions are likely barred by the various 
state and federal statutes of limitations. However, even if he can no longer be 
prosecuted, Applicant remains vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, and 
duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
