 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06856 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 30, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2009. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on July 16, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 5, 2009. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted two 
sets of documents, which were marked AE H through R and admitted without objection. 
After viewing Applicant’s documents, I reopened the record to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents. Applicant submitted another set of documents, which were 
marked AE S through YY and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandums are marked Hearing Exhibits (HE) I, II, and III. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 12, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 65-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1998. He is the deputy chief engineer on a major weapons 
system. He has worked on the same project, with his current employer or other defense 
contractors, since 1984. He is a graduate of a service academy. He served as a military 
officer after graduation and is a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War. He has been 
married for 41 years. He has four children and four stepchildren. His wife was a widow 
with four young children when he married her. Applicant’s children are adopted. The 
three youngest children are “special needs” children and still live with Applicant and his 
wife.1  
 
 Applicant traveled frequently for his job. Because of his time away from home, 
his wife handled their finances. There is a casino close to where Applicant lives. His 
wife started gambling at the casino. She developed a severe gambling problem and 
incurred significant losses. She stopped paying the household bills, including their 
mortgage, in order to fund her gambling. Applicant became aware of the extent of her 
gambling, and how far behind they were, in about November 2006. By that time, they 
were a number of months behind in their mortgage payments, and their lender was 
threatening foreclosure.2  
 
 Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in April 2007. They made 
some payments to the trustee before the bankruptcy was dismissed in February 2008. 
Applicant testified the bankruptcy was dismissed because they were unable to maintain 
the payments. He admitted another reason that he and his wife dismissed the 
bankruptcy was because she received a settlement from a lawsuit over an injury 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 47-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2: AE B, C. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
sustained in a car accident. He stated that the settlement was at least $40,000 and may 
have been $75,000, but he did not know the actual figure. He and his wife did not want 
the settlement to be considered in the bankruptcy for use in determining their payment 
plan. They did not use any of the settlement to pay their debts. His wife paid about 
$27,000 for a new car. Applicant stated that he did not know what she did with the 
remainder of the money. She indicated in a letter that she lost it gambling.3    
 
 Applicant lost his house to foreclosure in February 2008. He was about $17,000 
behind on the mortgage at one point. Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-A, 
Acquisition or Abandonment of Property. The form indicated that the fair market value of 
the property when the lender obtained it was $298,114. The balance of the principal on 
the mortgage was $267,396. Because of the equity in the property, no deficiency was 
owed on the mortgage.4    
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s bankruptcy, his delinquent mortgage, and three 
additional delinquent debts totaling about $22,104. Applicant had not made payments 
on any of the debts as of the date of hearing.5 
 
 Applicant submitted post-hearing documents that he sold to his sister ten shares 
of stock that he received as an inheritance. He stated that he did not realize the value of 
the stock until he received a check for $66,180 from his sister’s attorney on August 12, 
2009. He used the money from the sale to pay or settle his delinquent debts.6 
 
 Applicant settled the delinquent debt of $1,467 owed to a collection company on 
behalf of a financial institution, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, with a payment of $660 on 
August 27, 2009.7   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent debt of $16,762 owed to a collection company on 
behalf of a financial institution. Applicant settled the debt, which had grown to $16,910, 
with a payment of $10,215 on August 27, 2009.8   
 
 Applicant settled the delinquent debt of $3,977 owed to a collection company on 
behalf of an exercise equipment company, with a payment of $1,988 on August 27, 
2009. This debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.9   
                                                          
3 Tr. at 23-24, 42-44, 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE J. 
 
4 Tr. at 23-25, 31-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 34, 47, 51-52. 
 
6 AE L, O-S. 
 
7 GE 2; AE OO, WW-YY. 
 
8 AE EE-HH. 
 
9 AE U-W. 
 
 
4 
 
 In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant paid or settled seven 
additional debts with payments totaling about $19,860. He also paid his tax year 2008 
IRS debt of $2,876.10    
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling. His wife is receiving counseling for 
her gambling problem. She quit for a period and then started gambling again in about 
June 2009. It is unclear if she is currently gambling, but she stated in a letter that “deep 
down in [her] heart [she] never ever want[s] to gamble again.” When he found out she 
had a gambling problem, Applicant stopped her access to their funds. After she went a 
period without gambling, he returned her access to their accounts. She gambled away 
much of their funds.11 
 
 Applicant submitted a number of letters on his behalf. His job performance has 
been outstanding. He is praised for his, honesty, trustworthiness, patriotism, judgment, 
work ethic, professionalism, leadership, dedication, and integrity. The authors 
recommend that he retain his security clearance.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
10 AE T, X-DD, JJ-NN, PP-VV. 
 
11 Tr. at 25-33; AE D, E, I, J, L, M, S. 
 
12 AE D. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues resulted from his wife’s gambling problem. This 
qualifies as a condition that was outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has 
resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR. He also resolved eight debts not alleged in 
the SOR. He acted responsibly under the circumstances by making a good-faith effort to 
repay his overdue creditors. He has receiving financial counseling, and there are 
indications that the problem is being resolved. His financial problems do not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are all applicable  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
65-year-old highly-regarded engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked on the 
same weapons system for 25 years. He is a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War. He 
helped raise his stepchildren, and he and his wife adopted special needs children. His 
three youngest children still live at home. 
 
Applicant, like many people who travel frequently for their job, left the family’s 
finances in the hands of his spouse. She developed a gambling problem and essentially 
destroyed them out financially. They have resolved their delinquent debts through an 
inheritance. Applicant will never be completely financially secure because of his wife’s 
gambling addiction. He needs to keep close watch on the situation, monitor their 
finances, and quickly react to any indication that his wife is gambling. There is always 
the possibility that her gambling will bring them additional financial hardships. However, 
I find that his record, history, and character are sufficient to mitigate that risk. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
