 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01562 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F and E, Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 
 
2 
 
24, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 3, 2009, scheduling the hearing 
for August 18, 2009. The case was reassigned to me on August 12, 2009. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 2, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Evidence 
 
The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received without 
objection. Department Counsel requested administrative notice of a document which he 
described as a printout of what is viewed on the computer screen when an applicant is 
electronically filling out a security clearance application. The printout was marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The request for administrative notice was denied. The 
government then offered the document as a government exhibit. The document was 
remarked as GE 6 and admitted without objection.  
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two witnesses, and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were received without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted numerous 
documents, which were marked AE O through DD and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE II. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
renew his security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 2004. He 
served in the military from 1997 through 2001, and was honorably discharged. He is 
attending college. He was married from 1999 until his divorce in 2000. He married again 
in 2001. He has three children, ages 10, 6, and 3. He has custody of his 10-year-old 
child from his first marriage.1  
 
 Applicant was laid off from his employment in about February 2003. His wife was 
eight-months pregnant, and he lost his medical insurance. She had a difficult pregnancy 
then was unable to work. He obtained another job, but at a lesser salary. He worked 
several jobs with periods of unemployment until he was hired by his current employer in 
November 2004. During his period of underemployment and unemployment, a number 
of debts became delinquent and his leased car was repossessed. Applicant also 
engaged in a protracted custody battle over his oldest child, which involved high legal 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 71-72; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
fees.2 Applicant stated that he attempted to work with his creditors and various 
collection companies after his employment stabilized:  
 
I took budgeting classes and began trying to sort through the entire 
negative portion of our credit history. I made every attempt to deal with all 
of the collectors. It was overwhelming. Many of the debts had changed 
hands several times. Most of the debt collectors had trouble providing any 
original information on the debts or sources. Some of the companies did 
not even exist anymore. 
 
Frustrated I did what amounted to burying my head in the sand. I stopped 
checking my credit report. I gave up trying to get any kind of credit and 
resolved myself to save for anything we needed.3  
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.t. He denied owing the 
remaining debts. The total amount owed on the nine debts that Applicant admitted 
owing is about $14,500. Four of the nine debts that Applicant admitted owing are 
medical debts, totaling $364. Those four debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, 1.m, and 
1.t. Six of the twelve debts that Applicant denied owing are also medical debts, totaling 
$700. Those six debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.o through 1.r, and 1.u. Applicant 
provided evidence of numerous payments to medical providers. It also appears that 
several of the medical debts may be duplicates.4 Other individual debts are addressed 
below. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $596 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The 
debt is listed on the credit report dated October 5, 2007, but it is not listed on credit 
reports dated July 16, 2008, January 23, 2009, April 20, 2009, and August 17, 2009.5 
 
 On August 25, 2009, Applicant settled the delinquent debt of $4,777 to a 
collection company on behalf of a financial institution, with a payment of $2,982. This 
debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent debt of $12,374 for the deficiency owed on a car 
lease after it was repossessed in December 2003. Applicant admitted he had a car that 
was leased through the creditor named in the allegation, and the car was repossessed. 
He disputes the amount of the debt. He stated that he paid the lease for five years on a 
six-year lease and he did not believe he should still owe more than $12,000. The credit 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 29-32, 50-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 39, 60-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE U, W, Z-CC. 
 
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE H, M. 
 
6 AE W, X. 
 
 
4 
 
reports list the account as opened in January 2001, with payments of $475 per month 
for 64 months. The high credit on the debt is listed as $30,460, and the first delinquency 
is listed as occurring in December 2003. The balance on the debt was listed as $12,533 
on the 2007 credit report and $12,374 on the four credit reports from 2008 and 2009.7   
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $605 to a telecommunications 
company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. He admitted that he and his wife had cell phone 
service with the company, but he stated they discontinued the service after the end of 
their contract. He stated that he disputed the debt with the telecommunications 
company, but he did not dispute it with the credit reporting agencies. He was uncertain if 
the credit management company he is utilizing disputed the debt. He did not submit any 
documents in support of the dispute. The debt is listed on the 2007 credit report and 
both 2008 credit reports. It is not specifically listed under the telecommunications 
company on the two reports from 2009, but both reports list a debt of $605 to a 
collection company.8 
 
 A state tax lien of $8,481 for tax year 2003 was filed against Applicant in 
December 2007, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. The state notified Applicant that he did not 
file his state income tax return for that year. Applicant stated that he filed both his state 
and federal tax returns for that year. His federal return was filed electronically, but he 
had to mail his state return. He stated that he did not keep a paper copy of the return, 
and he lost the electronic copy from his computer when the computer crashed. The 
state has recouped this debt through garnishment of Applicant’s wages.9 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.s concern delinquent debts to the same telecommunications 
company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant admitted owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g 
but denied owing the other two debts. There is insufficient evidence for a determination 
that these represent distinct debts.10  
 
 Applicant has not made any payments on the four remaining non-medical debts 
that he admitted he owed. Those four debts, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.l, 
total about $9,400.11 
 
 Applicant was questioned about his finances for his background investigation on 
November 8, 2007. He admitted to his delinquent debts and described how he got into 
financial difficulties. He stated that both he and his wife were working at that time, and 
they were in good financial shape. He stated he had contacted a financial 
counseling/credit management company the month before, and he intended to make 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 31, 68-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE H, M. 
 
8 Tr. at 66-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE H, M. 
 
9 Tr. at 49-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE F. 
 
10 Tr. at 60-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE H, M. 
 
11 Tr. at 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
arrangements to pay his delinquent debts. Applicant is now earning a good income. He 
has a budget. He worked in Iraq and made about $152,000 in 2008. He also worked in 
Iraq during 2009. Applicant contracted with the credit management company in 
December 2008. He stated that he will pay his delinquent debts after the credit 
management company verifies the debts and negotiates settlements. He and his wife 
have paid a number of debts not alleged in the SOR.12  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) on August 
28, 2007. He answered “No” to Question 27b, which asked “In the last 7 years, have 
you had your wages garnished or had any property repossessed for any reason?” He 
also answered “No” to Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the last 7 years, have 
you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He 
stated that he did not know all the facts of his credit history when he submitted the SF 
86, and many of the debts had been sold to collection companies. He stated that he 
knew his credit report would be pulled, and he would be able to discuss his finances 
with an investigator. At the hearing, he continued to deny any intent to mislead the 
government about his finances. Finally, after several evasive answers, he admitted that 
he knew the answers to the financial questions on the SF 86 were untruthful.13 After 
considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant submitted a performance appraisal from his company for the annual 
period ending September 2008. It reflected superior job performance, both in the U.S. 
and overseas. A witness who has known Applicant since they served together in the 
military testified to Applicant’s character, the source of Applicant’s financial difficulties, 
and that Applicant’s financial problems were being addressed.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 35-40, 59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-E, G, J-L, N, P-W, Z-CC. 
 
13 Tr. at 41-48, 73-75, 102-103; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6. 
 
14 Tr. at 76-82; AE I. 
 
6 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant settled one debt after the hearing. He has not resolved a number of 
other debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) 
is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce, custody battle, 
unemployment, underemployment, and his wife’s medical issues. These all qualify as 
conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant told the 
background investigator in November 2007, that his finances had stabilized, both he 
and his wife were working, he had contacted a credit management company, and he 
intended to pay his delinquent debts. He did not contract with the credit management 
 
8 
 
company until December 2008. His tax debt was paid through a wage garnishment; he 
settled one debt after the hearing; and he paid a number of medical debts. Applicant 
earned $152,000 last year. He also worked in Iraq in 2009, which would indicate a 
substantial salary for this year. Because of the amount of money he earned, without 
additional voluntary and timely payments on his delinquent debts, I am unable to make 
a finding that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant has received some financial counseling. He earned a large salary the 
last two years. However, he has not made sufficient payments on his delinquent debts 
for a finding that there are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved or 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant paid several debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to those debts. Those 
payments do not support a finding that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve all 
his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to the unpaid debts. 
 
 Applicant paid a number of medical debts and disputed others. I find that AG ¶¶ 
20 (d) and 20(e) are applicable to the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.h, 1.j, 1.m, 
1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.t. and 1.u. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.s are duplicates of the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the duplicate debts. It is also 
applicable to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, which does not appear on the four most recent 
credit reports. Applicant did not submit documents in support of his dispute of the debt 
to a telecommunications company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to 
that debt. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
9 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in August 2007, when he failed to 
divulge an automobile repossession and delinquent debts. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as a 
disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant discussed his finances and delinquent debts when he was interviewed 
for his background investigation in November 2007. That does not constitute a prompt, 
good-faith effort to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts. While 
he receives credit for discussing the information with the investigator, it is insufficient to 
establish a mitigating condition. I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s honorable military record, important service to this country as a 
contractor in Iraq, favorable employment performance, and his character evidence. 
Applicant went through a difficult period financially, caused by his divorce, a protracted 
custody battle, unemployment, underemployment, and his wife’s medical issues. He has 
worked for his current employer since 2004. His service in Iraq generated a large 
income. Applicant does not have a huge amount of delinquent debt remaining. His 
failure to address his finances speaks more toward a disregard of his obligations rather 
than an inability to pay his debts. He intentionally provided false information on his SF 
86; he was less than truthful in his response to the SOR; and he was evasive at the 
hearing. Serious doubts remain about Applicant’s judgment, honesty, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.u:  For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
