                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08473 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is financially overextended and does not have the means to overcome 
her financial problems. She lacks a track record of financial responsibility. She failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 26, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges a security concern 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On April 21, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 2, 2009. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on June 30, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, post hearing, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 7, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 1.g, and 1.k-1.m. 
She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f, and 1.h-1.j. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered 
Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old senior programmer analyst employed by a defense 
contractor. She received her bachelor’s degree in computer base systems management 
in 1990, and her master’s of education in mathematics and computer science in 1993.  
 
In 2003, she had access to classified information at the secret level for a period 
of eight months. She was hired by her current employer in February 2008, and received 
interim access to classified information pending her security background investigation. 
There is no evidence that she has ever compromised classified information or that she 
has caused others to do so. 
 
Applicant married her husband in July 2000 and they are currently separated. 
She has had a difficult marriage, marred by numerous separation periods. They were 
separated from October 2004 to March 2006 (Tr. 37), during 2008, and from January 
2009, to the present (Tr. 33-34). She has four children of this marriage, ages 17, 11, 10, 
and 6. Until her January 2009 separation, she also was caring for her 13-year-old 
stepson.  
 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 
2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant claimed she has received almost no financial assistance from her 
spouse since 2008. He did not have a job before May 2009. She does not know where 
he is and has not been able to force him to provide financial support for her children (Tr. 
73).  
 
Applicant started having financial problems between 2000 and 2005. She filed for 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in June 2005, to prevent foreclosure on the 
mortgage on her home. The bank agreed to work a payment plan with her, and she 
requested the dismissal of her bankruptcy. Applicant sold her home in March 2007 (Tr. 
18). She attributed her financial problems, past and present, to four main causes: her 
husband’s periods of unemployment and his inability to find a steady job; her periods of 
unemployment and underemployment; her marital problems; and a failed business 
enterprise. Because of her limited income, she could not afford to pay both her past 
financial obligations and her day-to-day living expenses.  
 
Applicant testified her downfall over the last 11 years has been her inability to 
budget and to live a lifestyle commensurate with her earnings. She explained that when 
her spouse was working they lived the lifestyle of a two-income family. When he was 
unemployed, she was not able to modify her lifestyle and expenses to make their 
lifestyle proportionate for their reduced income (Tr. 74). 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since April 2000, except for periods of 
unemployment from October 2004 to February 2005, and while in between jobs. She 
was underemployed during 2005, when she was self-employed. She has worked for 
government contractors, or the government, from June 2005 to the present. She has 
been working for her current employer, a government contractor, since February 2008. 
 
In her February 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed having 
filed for bankruptcy in 2005, and that she had financial problems because of her periods 
of unemployment and her marital separations. Her background investigation addressed 
her financial status and included the review of March 2008, February 2009, and May 
2009 credit bureau reports (CBRs), her response to DOHA interrogatories, and her 
security clearance application.  
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent and/or charged off accounts, totaling 
approximately $35,000, which have been delinquent for a number of years. In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.e, and 1.k and 1.l were her debts. She explained that most of her medical debts were 
acquired when she was unemployed or self-employed and did not have medical 
insurance. She claimed that, at the time, her spouse was paying the family debts and he 
failed to address some of her medical bills (Tr. 28). Seven of the alleged delinquent 
debts can be considered as small debts since they are for less than $400. 
 
She claimed that some of the medical bills were incurred after she was employed 
and had medical insurance. Although some of the medical bills were already denied by 
her insurance carrier, she is resubmitting the medical bills for reconsideration. When 
 
4 
 
 
asked which of the seven alleged debts were acquired after she was employed and had 
insurance, Applicant indicated she had not researched the debts and could not identify 
them. Applicant’s documents show her insurance company has been paying medical 
bills incurred while under coverage (AE 2). 
 
Applicant satisfied the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f for $445 in April 2007 (AE 
1). She admitted the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g for $5,082, is her debt and that it has 
been delinquent for a number of years. She took a loan based on her anticipated 2003 
federal income tax return. The Internal Revenue Service intercepted Applicant’s 2003 
tax refund and she did not have the money to repay the loan. Applicant contacted the 
creditor for the first time three weeks before her hearing. She was offered a lump sum 
discounted settlement, but she does not have money to resolve this debt. She promised 
to settle and pay it in the near future (Tr. 53).  
 
She claimed the creditor will not take partial payments because the account has 
been charged off. Applicant never contacted the creditor prior to three weeks before the 
hearing, because she did not have the money to pay this or the other outstanding debts. 
She has very limited funds and needs to use available income to pay her utility bills and 
other necessities (Tr. 56) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h for $15,000 concerned a second mortgage 
Applicant took on a real estate property. It was paid in 2007, when she and her spouse 
sold the home (Tr. 59, GE 2, p. 8). The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i for $12,987 concerned 
a second mortgage (or equity loan) that Applicant took on another real estate property 
she owned and sold in 2003. She claimed the second mortgage or equity loan was paid 
with the proceeds of the sale (Tr. 59). The May 2009 CBR supports her claim (GE 4, p. 
4).  
 
Applicant disputed the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.j, concerning a debt for telephone 
services placed on collection by the provider. She claimed she paid this debt, and has a 
telephone services account with the same telephone service provider that is current (AE 
2, at 6). I find this allegation for Applicant.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial problems. She claimed she was 
not able to make more progress resolving her debts because of her January 2009 
separation. After her separation, she was trying to keep the house together both 
emotionally and financially. She admitted she continued to live the lifestyle of a two-
income household (Tr. 33-34). She explained she continued her two-income lifestyle 
because she was trying to protect her children, keeping them involved in their routines 
and activities.   
 
In May 2009, Applicant realized she could not afford to live the lifestyle of a two 
income household, and she started to change her lifestyle. She has been doing budget 
spreadsheets as her first step to reduce her expenses to conform to a one-income 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
budget (Tr. 66). At the time, her truck was past due as well as all of her other debts.2 
She testified that of the hearing date, her truck account was current and that she was 
current in almost all of her utilities (Tr. 35). She started working on her medical bills first 
because resolving them would involve filing claims and not taking money that she needs 
for her family’s day-to-day living expenses.  
 
When questioned further, Applicant admitted she had to ask her father for a 
personal loan to prevent her truck from being repossessed. Even with her father’s loan 
she is still one month behind on her truck payment (Tr. 96). Also, she admitted that as 
of the day of her hearing, she was one month behind on her electric and water bill. She 
promised she would pay those accounts as soon as she received her next pay check 
(Tr. 97). 
 
Applicant’s 2009 CBR shows she bounced a check. When asked about the 
insufficient funds draft, she claimed it was her husband who issued the check and that 
she intends to dispute the charges. The 2009 CBR shows the check was issued against 
her individual account (GE 4, at 3). She failed to present documentary evidence to show 
it was her spouse’s check or that she disputed the charges.  
 
Applicant has not participated in any financial counseling (Tr. 65). As of he 
hearing day, her net monthly income was around $6,107, with monthly expenses of 
approximately $5,898. Because it was summer and she was not paying for child care, 
her net remainder was approximately $587. When she pays child care, her net 
remainder is around $87.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
2  Applicant drives a 2004 GMC Yukon Denali-V8 she purchased in August 2008 for approximately 
$19,725 (AE 2, p. 4). When asked why she did not purchase a more economical vehicle she said she 
could not fit her kids in a smaller car (Tr. 103). 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”3 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
3  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 12 delinquent and/or charged off debts that have been 
delinquent for a number of years. Applicant has resolved four debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, and 
1.h – 1.j), totaling approximately $29,023. She still has eight debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, 
1.g, 1.k, and 1.l), totaling approximately $6,393 that are past due. These debts are 
Applicant’s debts as established by the evidence and Applicant’s admissions. In her 
post-hearing submission, Applicant promised to pay SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c - 1.e and 1.l within 
30 days. She noted SOR ¶ 1.b is no longer reflected in her last credit report, but she 
provided no documentary evidence to show that she paid the debt. She is now disputing 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k for $158. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.g for $5,082, she promised 
to contact the creditor and settle the debt.  
 
Applicant does not appear to have the financial means to pay her legal 
obligations, delinquent debts, and her day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 19(a): inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations, apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant established circumstances beyond her control contributing to her 
inability to pay her debts, i.e., her periods of unemployment and underemployment; 
frequent marital separations; a failed business; her husband’s periods of unemployment 
and his inability to find a steady job; and her husband’s failure to pay child support 
during separations. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial 
concerns.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She presented little documentary evidence of debt payments, contacts 
with creditors, settlement or negotiations of debts, or that she has properly disputed any 
of her debts. By her own admissions, Applicant’s financial problems are related to her 
having the lifestyle of a two-income family, when in fact she has been the sole provider 
most of the time. I also find she is financially overextended and her financial problems 
are not under control. She received a personal loan from her father to stop her truck 
from being repossessed, and she still is one month behind on her truck payment. As of 
her hearing date, she was one month behind on her electric and water bills. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not fully apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are not yet under control and her delinquent debts are likely to recur. She did 
not receive financial counseling, submit a budget, or provide documentation disputing 
her debts. She also failed to show she made good-faith efforts to resolve her debts. AG 
¶ 20(f) does not fully apply.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant is financially overextended. She lacks the income to bring his 
debts to current status. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is attempting to correct her 
financial situation by contacting her creditors and making a budget commensurate with 
her one-family income. She resolved four debts totaling $29,023. She has successfully 
worked for defense contractors and the government in the past, and now as employee 
of a defense contractor for approximately 20 months. There is no evidence she has ever 
compromised classified information or committed any security violations. Applicant 
expressed remorse for her financial mistakes and promised to repay her creditors. She 
established circumstances beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her 
debts. These factors show responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant has been continuously employed since April 2000, 
except for brief periods of unemployment from October 2004 to February 2005, and 
while in between jobs. She was underemployed during 2005, when she was self-
employed. She has worked for government contractors, or the government, since June 
2005 to the present. 
 
 On balance, I conclude Applicant presented insufficient evidence of having a 
track record of financial responsibility. She presented little documentary evidence of 
efforts to pay her financial obligations or to resolve her debts. There are no clear 
indications that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. Her inability 
to pay even relatively small debts, her bouncing a check, having to obtain a loan to 
make her truck payment; and being one month late on two utility bills show she is 
financially overextended. Her purchase of a large, luxury truck, albeit second hand, 
shows lack of judgment. She does not have the financial means to resolve her financial 
problems. Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e,    
    and 1.g and 1.k - 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f, and 1.h - 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
