1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------, --------- ---- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05531
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant owed more than $49,000 for twelve delinquent debts that accrued
during a 14-month period of unemployment after he was fired for cause. He resolved
two of the smaller debts shortly before and after his hearing, but has not yet established
a track record of financial responsibility or solvency. Based upon a thorough review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on November 28, 2007.
On April 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant
2
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 10, 2009. He answered the SOR in writing
(AR) on June 1, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 19, 2009, and DOHA assigned
the case to me on June 23, 2009.
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 23, 2009, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on July 7, 2009. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1
through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf,
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were also admitted without
objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until July 21, 2009, for
submission of additional evidence. On that date, he requested additional time until July
24, 2009, which I granted without objection. On that date, Department Counsel
forwarded 8 additional documents that were submitted by Applicant with no objection to
their admissibility. This evidence was marked AE J through Q, and admitted. Applicant
also submitted AE R on August 7, 2009, which was admitted, without objection by
Department Counsel, despite its untimeliness. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on July 17, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where he has worked
for two years as a logistics specialist. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted the truth of
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l, and denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.m.
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Applicant is divorced with one son for whom he provides $556 in monthly child
support. He held a security clearance for most of his 21-year enlisted career in the Army
that ended in 1997. He retired as a master sergeant (E-8), and earned three Meritorious
Service Medals, six Army Commendation Medals, three Army Achievement Medals,
and six Army Good Conduct Medals during his career. (GE 1 at 16-17, 26, 35-36; AR at
6; AE J; Tr. at 6-7, 43, 47.)
After leaving Army service, Applicant worked in several retail management jobs,
the most recent of which paid him more than $100,000 per year. He was fired from that
job in August 2006 for going out to lunch in violation of the company policy that required
at least one manager to be present in the store while it was open for business. He did
not obtain new employment until October 2007, when he was hired into his present job
paying $47,500. Between jobs he drew unemployment compensation and his retired
pay, but this combination was insufficient to prevent depletion of his savings and he
began incurring delinquent debts. (GE 1 at 11-12; GE 4 at 5; AR at 3; Tr. at 37-39.)
The $51 delinquent telephone bill, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, was incorrectly reported
on Applicant’s January 7, 2008, credit bureau report (CBR) that was obtained by the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. Applicant explained this during his
OPM interview on January 25, 2008, and contacted the credit bureau thereafter to have
it removed. This dispute was successful, and the debt does not appear on any of his
3
more recent CBRs. This was the only SOR-listed debt that Applicant denied in his
response to the SOR. (GE 2 at 18; GE 3; GE 4 at 7-8; GE 5; GE 6; AR at 2; Tr. at 49-
55.)
Applicant admitted that the remaining SOR-listed delinquent debts, totaling
$49,088, were his and remained unpaid as of October 2008. These 12 debts involved
loans and credit cards, with balances ranging from $183 to $10,754. They all became
delinquent between February and October 2007, and most did so during April or May of
that year. (GE 4; GE 5; AR at 1-2.)
Applicant entered a debt settlement and debt negotiation service agreement with
a law firm in January 2009. This arrangement required Applicant to make two initial
monthly payments of $921, followed by 38 monthly payments of $531. The law firm
undertook to attempt to negotiate settlement agreements with the creditors holding ten
of his delinquent debts totaling $37,200. The 40-month estimate for resolution of the
debts is based on a forecast average settlement-agreement rate of 40% of the original
debt amounts. Applicant thought all his delinquent debts were included, but the two
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.k were inadvertently omitted. After his hearing, he
modified the agreement to include the ¶ 1.h debt ($10,754), and paid ¶ 1.k debt ($183)
himself. The plan modification increased his remaining 34 monthly payments to $699. In
May 2009, the law firm negotiated a resolution and settled the SOR ¶ 1.e debt ($925)
for a payment of $379.  (AR at 3, 7-12; AE H; AE I; AE M; AE O; Tr. at 28-31, 36, 44-47,
49, 56-60.)
The remaining ten SOR-listed debts (¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f through 1.j, and 1.l)
had risen to a total reported delinquent amount of $49,548 by June 19, 2009. (GE 6.)
The debt plan now calls for Applicant to make $27,743 in total payments to the law firm,
of which $8,701 pays fees to the law firm and $19,042 is available for funding debt
settlements. (AE O.) Applicant submitted a personal financial statement showing
different monthly expenses than those appearing on the budget generated in connection
with his debt settlement agreement, but both showed a monthly net surplus of about
$400. (AE J; AR at 11.) He is current on all debt payments except those described
above, including his first and second mortgage loans and his auto loan. (GE 6 at 4.) 
A supervisor from the Army Depot for which Applicant provides support
submitted a letter attesting to his strong character, integrity, and honesty, and
describing him as loyal, helpful, and intelligent. (AE A.) His May 2009 performance
counseling form reported his outstanding work quality, cooperation, and dependability.
(AE B.) Applicant did not demonstrate a full understanding of his financial situation
during his hearing. However, his testimony and demeanor were forthright and credible.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
4
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to
be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded in mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides, “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Department Counsel asserted the applicability of two of these potentially
disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history
of not meeting financial obligations.” (Tr. at 16, 62.) From February to October 2007,
Applicant accumulated multiple delinquent debts that totaled more than $49,000. He
successfully disputed one minor SOR-listed debt, paid a second one shortly after his
hearing, and entered into an agreement with a law firm to attempt resolution of the
remaining debts for less than half the amount due. One debt has been settled under this
agreement to date, and it will require three more years to complete, even under the
optimistic assumption that all creditors will cooperate. Applicant’s present financial
inability to pay ten substantial remaining delinquencies, still totaling more than $49,000,
supports ongoing security concerns under AG ¶ 19(a). He is under continuing financial
duress, so he remains at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. The
evidence further established a two-year history of not meeting some significant financial
obligations, raising security concerns under AG ¶ 19(c). This history potentially indicates
poor self-control, lack of judgment, and unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations,
thereby raising questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from
the foregoing financial considerations. The potentially applicable mitigating conditions
are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
6
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
AG ¶ 20(a) was not established because Applicant’s many delinquencies arose
within the last few years and most continue at present. They resulted from his failure to
reduce expenditures during a 14-month period of unemployment after he was fired for
unreliable and untrustworthy behavior as a store manager. While loss of employment is
potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(b), his job loss was the direct result of his
irresponsible conduct, and drawing unemployment compensation for 14 months before
going back to work while spending on credit did not constitute responsible action
thereafter. Substantial delinquencies continue to date. His only demonstrated means
available to resolve them is a three-year plan, conditioned on his creditors accepting
settlements averaging 40% of what they are due, while the lawyers’ fees consume 32%
of his total program payments. This program involves some financial and legal
counseling and Applicant intends for it to lead to resolution of his outstanding debt.
However, it has yielded minimal results so far, with no substantial basis to conclude it
will succeed going forward. Only the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.k have actually
been resolved, and more than $49,000 in delinquent debts remain outstanding. While
these are steps in the right direction, meaningful mitigation is not yet established under
AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d). Applicant successfully disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m,
providing mitigation for that $51 delinquency under AG ¶ 20(e). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of
security concern was incurring 12 delinquent debts, which totaled more than $49,000
when the SOR was issued. (The 13  SOR-alleged debt was not his, and heth
successfully disputed it with the credit bureaus.) By the time the record closed, one
$925 debt had been resolved through his debt settlement plan and he paid one $183
debt directly to the creditor. However, the remaining ten delinquent debts still totaled
more than $49,000, due to continuing interest and fee charges. Although his 14-month
period of unemployment ended in October 2007, he did nothing to address or resolve
any of these debts until January 2009. His actions since that time have begun to
address the resulting security concerns, but he has not yet established a good-faith
track record of financial responsibility or permanent behavioral changes. The record
demonstrates his ongoing inability to address the majority of his delinquent debt, except
through a plan contingent on the creditors accepting 40% of what they are due and
requiring almost three more years to complete. Applicant’s ongoing insolvency
generates continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress. He exhibited an
incomplete understanding of his financial situation and failed to demonstrate that his
financial problems are unlikely to continue or worsen, at least for the next several years.
Applicant has a long record of excellent and honorable service to the national
defense, and is highly regarded by those with whom he now serves. On balance,
however, he presented insufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns arising from
his history of failing to meet financial obligations, and his inability to pay his substantial
delinquent debts. The record generates significant doubt as to his present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
