1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-06322
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 28, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on August 6, 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On March 30, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guidelines C and B for Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 15, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on May 12, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 2, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for June 24, 2009.  Applicant requested a continuance in order
to travel to Taiwan with his family.  The matter was rescheduled on July 13, 2009, and
2
set for August 19, 2009.  In order to better accommodate the schedule, the matter was
changed to August 20, 2009.  At the hearing the Government presented four exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4.  The Applicant presented no exhibits,
however, he testified on his own behalf, as did his wife.  The record remained open until
close of business on September 3, 2009, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to
submit additional supporting documentation.  The Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing
Exhibit, consisting of five character reference letters, referred to as Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.)
was received on August 28, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Taiwan.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. pp. 18-27).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted
into evidence, but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set
out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 49 years of age and has a Ph.D in Nuclear
Engineering.  He is employed as a Research Scientist for a defense contractor.  He
seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 15, 2009, the Applicant admitted all of the
factual allegations.  He also provided additional information to support his request for
eligibility for a security clearance.  
The Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1960.  He was raised in and completed his
mandatory military service in Taiwan.  He obtained his bachelors degree in nuclear
engineering at a public university in Taiwan.  In 1985, he emigrated to the United States
for purposes of pursuing graduate school.  At school, he met his wife, and became a
naturalized United States citizen in 1995.  His wife is a native born American citizen,
and they now have three children all born in the United States.  The Applicant
participates in the political system in the United States and follows its laws.  
The Applicant considers himself an American citizen.  (Tr. p. 36).  He has chosen
to maintain his dual citizenship with Taiwan because of his family back in Taiwan.  (Tr.
3
p. 37).  On July 6, 2000, he applied for and was issued a Taiwanese passport.  His
Taiwanese passport will not expire until July 6, 2010.  He continues to use his
Taiwanese passport instead of his United States passport to enter and exit Taiwan,
when he visits the country because of its convenience.  He is not willing to destroy or
surrender his Taiwanese passport.  (Tr. p. 38).  It would upset his father if he were to
give up his dual citizenship with Taiwan, and he does not want to upset his father.  (Tr.
p. 38).    
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant’s father, step-mother, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens
and residents of Taiwan.  The Applicant’s father is a retired career military police officer
with the Taiwanese Army.  The Applicant’s biological mother resides in the United
States.  The Applicant has a close and continuing relationship with his father and step-
mother in Taiwan.  The Applicant communicates with his in-laws in Taiwan about once a
month or so.       
In the past ten years, the Applicant has traveled to Taiwan on at least four
separate occasions to visit his elderly parents.  They have increasing health issues and
are not free to travel to the United States.  His most recent trip to Taiwan occurred in
2009.  In 2008, he traveled to China for two weeks to attend his great uncle’s funeral.
He and his sister are in-line to inherit his father’s home in Taiwan.  He has never been
approached by any governmental authority seeking to obtain information from him, and
he would never jeopardize the safety of the United States or compromise classified
information.   
The Applicant’s only financial resources are in the United States.  He owns a
home worth approximately $700,000.00, and has several retirement accounts worth
$70,000.00 and $40,000.000 respectively.  His wife testified that he has also invested
about $145,000.00 in life insurance policies that will provide college funds for his
children.  (Tr. p. 62).  
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Taiwan.
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy that has significant economic contacts with China.  It
has developed a strong economy since its separation from the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) in 1949.  The military’s primary mission is the defense of Taiwan against
the PRC, which is seen as the predominant threat and which had not renounced the use
of force against Taiwan.  Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic
intelligence and proprietary information.  Their activities have included the illegal export,
or attempted illegal export, of United States protected technology. 
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s supervisor, program manager,
coworker, and pastor all attest to the fact that the Applicant has demonstrated
4
unwavering loyalty to the United States.  He is described as a man of integrity, and
responsibility, who takes his work very seriously and has great pride in developing
technologies that help to protect our country and our soldiers abroad.  He is highly
recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A).    
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This
includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
5
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;  
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
6
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Administrative Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline C (foreign preference),
and Guideline B (foreign influence) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown
between Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign preference and has foreign
connections, may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises
legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government
must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to
abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1)
possession of a current foreign passport applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.
7
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States and continues to
exercise his rights and privileges as such.  After becoming a United States citizen in
1995, he applied for, obtained, and still possesses a valid Taiwanese passport that he
regularly uses to enter and exit Taiwan during his visits.  He has no intentions of
relinquishing this foreign passport.  Although he could use his United States passport,
he chooses to use his Taiwanese passport for convenience purposes.  The possession
of a valid foreign passport is disqualifying and under the circumstances of this case, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the mitigating conditions apply. 
The Applicant has a number of family members, including his father, step-
mother, and in-laws, who are citizens of and reside in Taiwan, with whom he maintains
a close and continuing relationship.  He is so close to his father in Taiwan, a retired
Taiwanese military officer, that he does not want to upset him by relinquishing his
Taiwanese passport or renouncing his dual citizenship with Taiwan.  Although there is
no evidence that any of his family members in Taiwan continue to be associated in any
way with the Taiwanese government, the evidence is clear that the Applicant has a
close family bond.  This strong evidence of affection with his immediate family in Taiwan
could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Moreover, the current political
situation in Taiwan elevates the cause for concern in this case.  The possibility of
foreign influence exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is vulnerable to foreign
influence.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guidelines B and C of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the
Directive.  Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under
Guidelines B and C.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.:  Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.:  Against the Applicant
8
Subpara. 1.c.:  Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.:  Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. 2.a.:  Against the Applicant
Subpara. 2.b.:  Against the Applicant
 Subpara. 2.c.:  Against the Applicant
 Subpara. 2.d.:  Against the Applicant
Subpara. 2.e.:  Against the Applicant
 Subpara. 2.f.:   Against the Applicant
 Subpara. 2.g.:  Against the Applicant
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
