 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05420 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 2, 2005. On 
April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines E and J. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 15, 2009; answered it on May 1, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
4, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 18, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on July 9, 2009. The hearing was tentatively scheduled for August 
19, 2009. Applicant’s counsel requested a continuance until September 16, 2009, due 
to conflicting obligations (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I). I granted his request, and DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 13, 2009, rescheduling the hearing for September 
16, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony 
of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
I kept the record open until September 25, 2009, to enable Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX K and L, and he resubmitted 
AX D and E, previously admitted. The cover letter and facsimile cover page for 
Applicant’s additional exhibits are attached to the record as HX II. Department 
Counsel’s response to Applicant’s additional evidence is attached to the record as HX 
III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 24, 2009. The record closed on 
September 25, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. His 
responses to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 2.a were ambiguous, and I have 
treated them as denials. Applicant’s admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant was born in Ethiopia on June 12, 1959. He was married in October 
1981. He obtained a college degree in Ethiopia. He came to the U.S. in April 1984 and 
became a U.S. citizen in July 1990. His wife became a U.S. citizen in February 1995. 
They have two daughters, born in 1989 and 1995. The older daughter is a college 
senior and the younger is in the ninth grade (Tr. 48-49). He attended a community 
college from September 1989 to November 1991, but he dropped out before receiving a 
degree or certificate. He attended another community college from April to September 
1997 and received a certificate in information technology systems. He has worked in the 
field of computer science since about 1998 (Tr. 76). 
 
Applicant has worked for various federal contractors and held a security 
clearance since 1995. In addition, he has worked part-time as a security guard at a 
federal agency since 1994 (Tr. 46). 
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor as a network technician from 
September 1998 to March 2000. He resigned from this job after being accused of 
viewing pornographic materials on a government computer. A summary of a personal 
subject interview conducted in April 2008 refers twice to his resignation. It first recites 
that Applicant was “forced to resign,” and it later states he was “asked to resign” as a 
 
3 
 
 
result of his conduct (GX 2 at 3). In response to DOHA interrogatories on August 5, 
2008, Applicant reviewed this summary and agreed it was accurate (GX 2 at 2).  
 
In response to the same interrogatories, Applicant added a statement that he 
experienced many pop-up links as he browsed the internet to find out why the network 
was slow. He stated he usually deleted them immediately and did not view them (GX 2 
at 6).  
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted he watched pop-up pornographic materials for 
five or 10 minutes on about 30 occasions (Tr. 56-57). He denied being forced to resign 
(Tr. 55), but he admitted that he resigned because he was embarrassed by the 
accusation and ashamed of his conduct (Tr. 59-61, 84). He did not tell his wife why he 
resigned until he received the SOR (Tr. 87, 104). At the time of his resignation, he told 
his wife he had asked to be moved to another contract because it was too expensive to 
work in the area and he was not comfortable with his co-workers (Tr. 105-06). 
 
Applicant presented a statement from an expert in information technology, 
attesting that in March 1999 through March 2000, when Applicant viewed the 
pornographic pop-ups, software programs to filter pop-ups were not robust or mature. 
Consequently, anyone opening an email containing spyware or pop-ups could appear to 
have intentionally visited pornographic internet sites (AX H). Applicant had never met 
the expert, and there is no evidence that the expert was familiar with the circumstances 
in which Applicant viewed the pornographic pop-ups (Tr. 89). 
 
In January 2001, Applicant was charged with two counts of illegally soliciting 
fares at an airport. He testified the incidents occurred when a friend who operated an 
airport shuttle service asked him to meet a customer at a local airport, because the 
friend was scheduled to be elsewhere. While looking for the customer, Applicant offered 
to transport another individual, who was an undercover policeman. He was issued a 
ticket for the illegal solicitation. In response to DOHA interrogatories and in his hearing 
testimony, he stated that he did not know his conduct was illegal (Tr. 97; GX 3 at 3). 
However, he solicited another individual about ten minutes later and was issued a 
second ticket. He was not arrested (GX 3 at 3; Tr. 91-94, 102). He hired a lawyer 
because he was facing a $1,000 fine for each solicitation (Tr. 94). He found the 
prospect of large fines “shocking” and a source of “big trouble” in his household (Tr. 95-
96). He was convicted of one of the two counts of illegal solicitation and fined $300 plus 
$55 in court costs (GX 4). 
 
 Applicant was hired by his current employer as a desktop analyst in March 2004, 
and promoted to project manager in December 2005 (AX I at 1). He supervises about 
30 employees and assists the manager of the desktop support unit (Tr. 114). He has a 
reputation as an extremely conscientious employee. He usually arrives at work at 4:30 
a.m., at least an hour and a half before his scheduled starting time (Tr. 49-50). In July 
2004, he was one of about 25 employees, out of a total of 500, who were recognized as  
“charter members” of the communications team working in the Pentagon (AX J; Tr. 73-
 
4 
 
 
74). Based on his performance, he received substantial pay raises in June and July 
2006 (AX I at 2-3).  
 
When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in November 2005, 
he answered “no” to the question asking if, during the last seven years, he was fired, 
quit a job after being told he would be fired, left a job by mutual agreement following 
allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory performance, or left a job for any other 
reasons under unfavorable circumstances. He did not disclose his resignation under 
unfavorable circumstances in March 2000. He testified he did not disclose it because it 
was embarrassing (Tr. 104).  
 
On the same security clearance application, Applicant also answered “no” to the 
questions about his police record. He did not disclose his conviction for illegally 
soliciting fares. In his response to DOHA interrogatories in November 2008, he stated 
that the outcome of the incident was so minor that he forgot about it (GX 3 at 3). At the 
hearing, he testified he did not think it was necessary to disclose it and he “completely 
forgot” about it when he was completing his security clearance application (Tr. 70-71). 
 
Applicant’s facility security officer regards him as an excellent employee who has 
exhibited the highest standards of security and management responsibilities (AX A). He 
testified that Applicant is reliable and “probably the best project manager we have.” He 
testified repeatedly that he does not expect recurrence of Applicant’s inappropriate use 
of computers, airport rule violations, and intentional omissions of embarrassing 
information on his security clearance (Tr. 116-18, 120, 125-26). He testified Applicant 
has been very straightforward and honest about his past mistakes (Tr. 118).  
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor has known Applicant since May 2008 and has 
frequent, daily contact with him (Tr. 137). He regards Applicant as honest, trustworthy, 
and very reliable (Tr. 140-42). He does not believe that Applicant’s previous behavior 
will recur (Tr. 148-49).  
 
Applicant’s security manager, who has more than 14 years of experience and 
has known him for more than three years, believes he has high integrity and a strong 
sense of security awareness (AX C). She testified that in September 2005 she initiated 
a security program that includes strong emphasis on self-reporting of “security 
anomalies” in personal life (Tr. 168). She is aware of the allegations in the SOR, but she 
decided to testify for Applicant because she considers him a responsible and valued 
employee. Applicant’s hearing was the first and only time in her career that she had 
testified for an applicant (Tr. 172). She described Applicant as having a “strong sense of 
integrity,” being very “security-aware,” and taking great pride in his work (Tr. 172). She 
testified she believed Applicant would never repeat his past mistakes (Tr. 187). She 
believes Applicant would voluntarily disclose embarrassing information because of the 
effectiveness of her company’s education program (Tr. 193).  
 
A co-worker who has known Applicant for six years and is aware of the 
allegations in the SOR finds it “absolutely unimaginable” that Applicant would engage in 
 
5 
 
 
such misconduct again, because of his strong character and dedication to his work and 
his family (AX L at 2). Another co-worker who has known Applicant for four years 
considers him a person of high integrity, professionalism, and trustworthiness. He 
describes Applicant as a person who combines operating “by the book” with great 
compassion for those he leads (AX F). 
 
Applicant’s senior program manager, a retired brigadier general in the Air 
National Guard, submitted a lengthy statement on Applicant’s behalf.1 He has worked in 
the same secured work space with Applicant for five years. He is aware of the 
allegations in the SOR. He describes Applicant as a person “who strives to do the right 
thing, takes initiative, and leads by example.” He is convinced that Applicant’s 
misconduct and his failure to disclose it on his security clearance application will not 
recur (AX K at 1-2).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not a determination as to 
                                                          
1 His senior program manager was scheduled to testify personally, but was unable to attend the hearing 
because of the unexpected death of an immediate family member.  
 
6 
 
 
the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant resigned from employment in March 2000, in lieu of 
termination, for viewing inappropriate websites on a government computer (SOR ¶ 1.a), 
he falsified his security clearance application by deliberately failing to disclose that he 
left his employment in March 2000 under unfavorable circumstances (SOR ¶ 1.b), and 
he falsified his security clearance application by failing to disclose that he had been 
charged and convicted of illegally soliciting fares and fined a total of $355, including 
costs (SOR ¶ 1.c). The security concern relating to Guideline E is set out in AG & 15 as 
follows: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The evidence supporting the allegation that Applicant resigned “in lieu of 
termination” is conflicting. The security investigator’s summary of his interview of 
Applicant in April 2008 recites that Applicant was “forced to resign” and was “asked to 
resign.” Although Applicant reviewed this summary and stated it was accurate, he 
 
7 
 
 
insisted at the hearing that he did not resign in lieu of termination. I need not resolve 
this conflict, however, because Applicant’s testimony at the hearing is sufficient to 
establish that he resigned under unfavorable circumstances and was required to 
disclose that fact on his security clearance application.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition pertaining to Applicant’s falsification of his 
security clearance application is “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant 
admitted he deliberately did not disclose his resignation under unfavorable 
circumstances, thus raising AG ¶ 16(a).  
 Applicant’s admissions regarding his nondisclosure of the illegal solicitation were 
equivocal. He admitted that he should have disclosed it, but he offered excuses for not 
doing so. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the burden 
of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s state of mind 
when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence 
as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning 
an applicant’s state of mind when he omitted the information.  
 Applicant claimed that he omitted mention of his conviction of illegal solicitation 
because he forgot about it. I find this explanation implausible and unconvincing. He was 
able to recount the incident in detail when he was interviewed by a security investigator. 
He testified he was shocked when faced with the prospect of paying $2,000 in fines. He 
incurred legal expenses to hire a lawyer, and encountered ‘big problems” at home 
because of the potential financial impact of his conduct. Under all the circumstances, I 
am not persuaded that he forgot about the incident. I am satisfied he deliberately 
omitted the information.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions pertaining to Applicant’s resignation from 
employment in March 2000 are as follows: 
AG ¶ 16(c): “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information”; 
AG ¶ 16(d): “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
 
8 
 
 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; [and] (4) evidence of significant misuse of 
Government or other employer's time or resources”; and 
AG ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.” 
 
 Applicant’s resignation in March 2000 for viewing pornographic materials on his 
government computer raises AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), and (e). His conviction for illegal 
solicitation at the airport is not an offense that was likely to make him vulnerable to 
coercion or exploitation. However, although he claimed he did not know his solicitation 
was illegal, he continued to solicit potential fares after receiving the first ticket, 
demonstrating an unwillingness to follow the rules, thereby raising AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a), (c), (d), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Security concerns arising from falsification of a security clearance application 
may be mitigated if that “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 
17(a). Applicant made no effort to correct his omissions until he was confronted with the 
evidence by a security investigator in April 2008, more than two and a half years after 
submitting his falsified application. This mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense 
is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s misuse of a government computer by viewing pornography for five to ten 
minutes at a time on about 30 occasions was not minor, infrequent, or an event 
occurring under unique circumstances. On the other hand, it occurred more than nine 
years ago. Applicant’s embarrassment, greater maturity, and realization that such 
conduct can cost him his job and harm his family make it unlikely to recur. His illegal 
solicitation was minor, happened twice within ten minutes, and occurred more than eight 
years ago. His falsification of his current security clearance application was not minor 
and did not happen under unique circumstances. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is established 
for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but not for the falsifications alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.c.  
 
9 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his misuse of his computer 
and is embarrassed by it. He has acknowledged his illegal solicitation. He has 
acknowledged his failure to disclose his resignation under unfavorable circumstances 
on his security clearance application, but was less than candid about the reasons for his 
failure to disclose his conviction of illegal solicitation. He is devoted to his job, but he 
resorted to deception to protect it. He has received additional security training about the 
impact of personal conduct on security and the importance of self-reporting “security 
anomalies” in personal life. I conclude this mitigating condition is established for the 
conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but not for the falsifications alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c. 
 
 Security concerns arising from personal conduct may be mitigated if “the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). Applicant has disclosed his misuse of a 
government computer and the reasons for his resignation in March 2000 to his 
supervisors, several coworkers, and his wife. The illegal solicitation was not an offense 
that was likely to make him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He has 
disclosed his falsification of his security clearance application. I conclude this mitigating 
condition is established for all the allegations in the SOR. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose his termination 
under unfavorable circumstances and his citation and conviction for unlawful solicitation 
of fare was a felony, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. The concern raised by criminal 
conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. The relevant disqualifying 
conditions are “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), respectively. 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberate and materially false answer on a security clearance application is a 
serious crime within the meaning of Guideline J.  
 
 False statements having the potential to affect a final agency decision are 
“material” within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. In addition, false statements or 
 
10 
 
 
omissions are material if they are capable of causing an agency to forego and 
investigation, or are capable of misleading an agency in its investigatory functions. 
ISCR Case No. 91-0901 (App. Bd. Jul. 1, 1993), 1993 WL 255979 (citing federal cases 
interpreting 18 U.S.C. § 1001).  
 
I do not believe that Applicant’s conviction of what was tantamount to a traffic 
offense would have affected a decision on his continued eligibility for a clearance, 
affected a decision whether to investigate further, or would have misled the government 
in its investigatory functions. Thus, I conclude that Applicant’s intentional omission of his 
conviction for illegal solicitation of a fare, while sufficient to raise a disqualifying 
condition under Guideline E, was not sufficient to constitute a felony under 18 U.S.C. § 
1001. On the other hand, Applicant’s resignation under unfavorable circumstances was 
a material fact, and his intentional omission of that fact on his security clearance 
application raises AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns arising from criminal conduct may be mitigated by evidence 
that “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). For the 
reasons set out above in my discussion of AG ¶ 17(c) under Guideline E, I conclude 
that this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigating if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). Applicant expressed remorse for his intentional failure to disclose his resignation 
under unfavorable circumstances. He has established a reputation with his current 
employer for high integrity and dedication. As noted above, however, he was not 
completely candid during his security interview in April 2008 and at the hearing. Thus, I 
am not satisfied that he has been rehabilitated, and I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is not 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
11 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for government contractors and held a clearance for about 
24 years. His misconduct was not the product of immaturity or inexperience. He was 41 
years old when he resigned from previous employment under unfavorable 
circumstances, and 45 years old when he falsified his security clearance application. He 
is very dedicated to his job and he performs it with dedication and skill. Unfortunately, 
he has demonstrated that he will engage in deception to protect his job. His security 
manager is confident that his training in the importance of self-disclosure will preclude 
recurrence, but I do not share that confidence after carefully reviewing his conduct, his 
statements to a security investigator, and his testimony at the hearing. I gave great 
weight to the strongly supportive statement of Applicant’s senior program manager, a 
retired general officer in the Air National Guard, but Applicant’s lack of complete candor 
during the investigative process and at the hearing leaves me with doubts about his 
reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and 
J, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
