                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In re: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09645 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 13, 2007, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On April 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J 
(Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 17, 2009. She requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 26, 
2009. I received the case assignment on May 27, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on June 5, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 23, 2009. 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through K, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 6, 2009. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by deleting the date of 
“September 8, 2008” in Subparagraph 1.a. and substituting therefore the date of “April 
25, 2007.”  Applicant had no objection to this amendment because it inserted the correct 
date of her arrest on child endangerment charges for an erroneous date.  I granted the 
motion. (Tr. 9-11) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. She also provided additional information to support her request 
for continued eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, divorced in 2009 from her husband, and the mother of 
two minor children. The first child was born in 2004, and the second daughter in 2007. 
Applicant married her husband in November 1994, during her first semester of college. 
She graduated from college in 1998 with a bachelor’s degree in mathematics. Since 
then, she has worked for a defense contractor. (Tr. 34, 40-45, 60; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant’s husband worked while she attended college. After she became 
employed upon her graduation, he became a non-working husband from 1999 until his 
arrest in September 2006. He was arrested on the accusations of his daughter from his 
first marriage that he had molested her. Her husband’s daughter lived with them from 
1999 to 2006. He was convicted on his guilty plea, and sentenced to five years 
confinement. Applicant filed for divorce from him in October 2008, and the divorce was 
granted in March 2009. Applicant would file for a protective order if her former husband 
attempted to contact her or their children. The divorce decree prohibited contact 
between Applicant’s children and her former husband. (Tr. 40-44, 50-52, 69, 70; 
Exhibits 1 and 2) 
 
 When Applicant’s husband was arrested in 2006, the police searched the house 
for evidence on the molestation charge. During that process, they found animal feces 
from the three dogs and one cat Applicant’s family maintained, though Applicant only 
recalls feces in the basement area.  The police reported seeing a cockroach crawl from 
diapers to be used for Applicant’s infant daughter. Applicant admits cockroaches 
infested her house for months before the arrest, but she never saw any near her 
daughter. She attempted to kill the cockroaches with insecticides from the hardware 
store, but was unsuccessful. The arresting officers also reported piles of debris 
 
3 
 
 
throughout the house, making the house interior messy. Applicant’s husband took care 
of the dogs, but did not clean up after them. He also did some cooking, but never 
washed the dishes. He was a compulsive buyer of various objects including beads for 
his jewelry making hobby, clothes he never put away neatly, and many other items 
which were never used or stored properly, resulting in the messy appearance of the 
home. Additionally, the police reported a repugnant odor throughout the house which 
Applicant claimed she did not smell. Finally, there were prescription medications kept in 
child-proof containers but within the reach of Applicant’s daughter and step-daughter. 
(Tr. 36, 47-57, 77, 78; Exhibits 2-4)   
 
 Applicant’s husband was diagnosed as bi-polar in 2003 and used prescription 
medications to treat his condition. He also controlled and manipulated Applicant from 
the date of their marriage until his arrest by limiting her contact with her family and 
friends, and exerting other forms of control over her activities.  Applicant did not 
recognize the situation because it occurred gradually over time.  She tried to keep the 
family together by working all day, taking care of the children, including home-schooling 
her step-daughter, and doing what work she could around the house without upsetting 
her husband.  She described her actions as “walking on egg shells” when dealing with 
him. (Tr. 22, 30-39, 54, 66, 73, 81) 
 
 Applicant was charged in April 2007 with two counts of felony endangerment of a 
child under state law. She turned herself into the police to respond to the charges.  She 
retained an attorney. The first charge referred to the endangerment of her step-
daughter, and the second to her only child at that time, her daughter. The 
endangerment allegations were that she did not maintain a residence fit for human 
habitation. In April 2008, Applicant pled guilty to both felonies.  She pled guilty to avoid 
being sentenced to jail. The state court sentenced Applicant to 90 days home 
confinement on the first charge, and five years confinement on the second charge. 
However, the confinement was suspended and Applicant was sentenced alternatively to 
five years probation, attendance at parenting classes, psychological evaluation and 
treatment as directed by the probation services in her state, and adherence to any other 
directives issued as part of her probation. Applicant has now served 18 months 
successfully on her probation. Applicant completed the parenting classes swiftly. She 
cleaned her house and sold it.  She purchased another one, and regained custody of 
her oldest daughter whom the state had placed in foster care for six months. (Tr. 24, 53, 
64, 65, 84, 88; Exhibits 2-4) 
 
 Applicant consulted with a marriage counselor in 1997 and 2000. She also went 
to a family counselor in 2006. She read books on setting personal boundaries, and 
consulted with friends on personal relationships. Applicant had psychological counseling 
in 2006 and early 2007 pursuant to court order. She testified that counseling found only 
her parenting skills needed improvement. Now Applicant contends her prior lack of good 
judgment will not recur, and she has learned and changed much in the past three years 
since her arrest.  In Applicant’s own opinion, she provides a good household for her 
daughters, and will not allow herself to be manipulated. Her mother’s testimony is that 
Applicant is so organized that she prepares and freezes the meals for the upcoming 
 
4 
 
 
week each weekend. Applicant does not want to do anything to risk losing her children 
to foster care again. She is better organized and focused since her divorce.  (Tr. 23, 25, 
68-70, 77, 78, 84-87)  
 
 From 1998 to the present time, Applicant had a “secret” security clearance. She 
did not have any security violations reported in that 11-year period. In 2006, Applicant 
earned $75,000 from her job. She graduated from college “summa cum laude.” 
Applicant made a well-organized and articulate presentation of her case. (Tr. 45, 46, 60, 
64) 
 
 Applicant submitted 11 character letters. Her Answer to the SOR included a 
character letter from her job’s team leader. This character letter describes Applicant as 
sincere and dedicated to her job. Applicant is recognized as someone who maintains 
diligently the security of classified information. He reports that in the past Applicant had 
some instances of “poor performance within the team” that he ascribes to her domestic 
situation at the time. In the past two years, her performance has steadily improved.  She 
also kept him and other supervisors informed about her situation. Applicant’s brother 
submitted a letter discussing the family situation and how it has improved after 
Applicant’s husband was arrested and she divorced him. The remaining character 
letters praise Applicant for her honest and competent work. One letter was submitted by 
the foster parents of Applicant’s child in 2006 and 2007. They make announced and 
unannounced visits to Applicant’s home, and report it is clean and safe, as are her 
children.  (Exhibits A to K) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
5 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  Of these conditions, three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant pled guilty to two state felony charges of child 
endangerment. Her sentence included five years of probation, starting in April 2008. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant remains on probation at the present time. Thus, these three conditions are 
supported by the facts.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 The facts of Applicant’s child endangerment charges occurred during an 
oppressive marriage to a controlling and physically lazy man. Applicant earned the 
household income, maintained the house, and home-schooled her stepdaughter, 
repeating this process each day. Her husband was arrested in 2006 for child 
molestation and convicted. His sentence of five years confinement allowed Applicant to 
break free from his control. She divorced him, sold their former home, bought a new 
one, and regained custody of her child. She will obtain a protective order to keep her 
former husband away from herself and her children. Applicant has learned to make her 
own decisions and be responsible for her own actions. Her character statements show 
persuasively that her family situation has improved greatly. During all the home turmoil, 
Applicant continued to perform well at her job. AG ¶ 32 (a) applies. 
 
 Applicant is intelligent and well-educated. However, she lacked personal strength 
to recognize that her marital situation was destructive and that she was too subservient 
to her husband. Her husband controlled every aspect of her life within the marriage. The 
pressures her husband exerted on her are gone and will not return.  She divorced him 
and he resides in a state penitentiary for five years until 2012. AG ¶ 32 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant reformed her life. She took control of it, although it took state criminal 
action and her step-daughter’s complaint against her husband to start the reform 
process.  Applicant accepted responsibility for her actions by pleading guilty to two child 
endangerment charges for not maintaining her house in a habitable condition. She 
expressed remorse for her actions during her marriage, and emphasized her 
commitment to her children. She vowed not to do anything in the future to jeopardize 
her custody of them. Her brother and mother presented evidence of Applicant’s marital 
history and how that environment in her home has dramatically improved. Applicant 
attended parenting classes, and completed all probationary requirements, other than 
 
7 
 
 
the time period imposed by the court. Her supervisors’ character statements show 
Applicant is well-regarded in her company for her work ethic and product. AG¶ 32 (d) 
applies. 
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying.  One of these conditions applies to Applicant’s child endangerment 
situation and felony convictions: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to maintain a healthy home environment for her child, and her 
step-daughter, coupled with her continued failure over 12 years to recognize the 
controlling environment created by her husband and his molestation of his daughter, is 
personal conduct by Applicant that made her vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress.  In addition, Applicant was exploited, manipulated, and placed under duress by 
her husband during the duration of their marriage. For an intelligent and educated 
 
8 
 
 
person to have acted in such a way causes serious concerns about her judgment and 
her ability to be manipulated easily. AG ¶ 16 (e) applies. 
  
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  Four of these 
mitigating conditions could apply: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Three years have passed since Applicant’s husband was removed from her life 
by his arrest and conviction for child molestation. She divorced him in 2009 and has not 
resumed any contact with him, and does not want to do so. She transformed her life, 
and provides a healthy and happy environment for her two daughters. While in the 
marriage, she attempted to do all the work in the house and earn the family income, but 
failed to recognize the gradual and systematic control her husband exerted over all the 
family members. Her judgment was overwhelmed by her husband at home.  Her 
reliability and trustworthiness were not at issue in the work environment, nor was her 
judgment. ( AG ¶ 17 (a) applies.  
 
 Applicant admitted her failure to keep the house and children clean, and allowing 
her husband to accumulate things which cluttered the house. She admits the house was 
a mess. Now she has her own home without her husband, and the character witnesses 
who have been in that home state that the children and home environment are neat and 
clean. Applicant participated in the court-ordered counseling, and obtained more 
information on her own in the past three years. The divorce prevents Applicant from 
continuing her past behavior, and it is unlikely to recur based on the significant changes 
and honest admissions Applicant made. AG ¶ 17 (d) applies. 
 
 Applicant divorced her husband and acknowledges the manipulative control he 
exercised over her during their marriage. She strongly asserts she is now in control of 
her life, and will not allow the same situation to recur. She is credible in that assertion.  
 
9 
 
 
It is bolstered by her demonstrated commitment to her children’s welfare. AG ¶ 17 (e) 
applies.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce removes her from the person who committed criminal activity, 
her former husband. He contributed largely to the mess in their house which created the 
unhealthy environment for Applicant’s children. He also committed the criminal child 
molestation acts upon his daughter from his first marriage. Applicant has now removed 
herself totally from that unhealthy environment. She is committed to keeping her former 
husband away from her and her children. AG ¶ 17 (g) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that each case be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an educated mature 
adult when the unsanitary environment was created. She was not emotionally strong 
enough to assert herself against her husband’s control, and allowed the situation to 
continue. Her actions were not appropriate but understandable in the context of the 
controlling aspects of her marriage. She has changed her behavior, admitted her 
wrongdoing, taken corrective action, and removed the potential for coercion, pressure, 
exploitation, or duress within her personal relationships. Her past behavior is not likely 
to recur.   
 
Furthermore, Applicant has had a security clearance for 11 years without any 
security violations. She kept her personal situation separate from her work relationship.  
 
Applicant realizes she made harmful mistakes that hurt herself and children by 
continuing her marriage to a controlling and manipulative man.  She was not an equal 
 
10 
 
 
partner in that relationship. The total environment contributed to the endangerment 
situation that led to criminal charges. Now Applicant has corrected the problem. Her 
family and friends know of her past problems, and gave letters of support showing the 
rehabilitation Applicant has done.  
 
Applicant’s presentation was credible and persuasive on all the salient and 
relevant issues. She did not contest the felony charges placed against her, which is part 
of her rehabilitative efforts. She has clearly made the well-being of her children 
paramount in her life.  She is successfully participating in the probation the state court 
imposed as her sentence on the second felony child endangerment charge.  Applicant 
informed her supervisors of her situation, and she has been allowed to retain her job. It 
has been three years since her husband was arrested and removed from the home.  
Applicant has used that time to her advantage to acknowledge her past errors and 
change her behavior to benefit her children and herself. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her criminal conduct 
and personal conduct.  I also conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
