  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 ISCR Case No. 08-07803 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). 2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- )
SSN: --------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-07803
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                
______________
Remand Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case  in which the Appeal Board remanded for1
further processing.  In my initial June 15, 2009 decision—which is incorporated herein2
by reference—I concluded that Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed, or falsified
material facts about his use of illegal drugs on two different personnel security
 The findings of fact are limited to the issues on remand.  3
 Answer; Tr. 28–33; Exhibit 3; and Exhibit C. 4
 Exhibit C. 5
2
questionnaires. On that basis, I decided the Guideline E personal conduct security
concerns against Applicant. The Appeal Board remanded the case with instructions to
make findings of fact and reach conclusions concerning security concerns alleged in the
Statement of Reasons (SOR) under Guidelines F for financial considerations, J for
criminal conduct, and G for alcohol consumption. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant replied to the SOR allegations as follows: (1) he denied the financial
considerations allegations because the five debts in question were paid; (2) he admitted
the eight allegations of criminal conduct; (3) his answers to the alcohol consumption
allegations were mixed; and (4) he denied the two falsification allegations and attributed
the matter to accidental oversight. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the
following facts are established by substantial evidence.3
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is currently
employed as a Java developer. He is seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance
for the first time.  
The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted five delinquent debts in amounts
ranging in amounts from $97 to $3,655 for a total of $7,089. These debts are now paid.4
The best evidence is Applicant’s January 2009 credit report, which shows no current
collection accounts.5
The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted eight incidents of minor criminal
conduct, or involvement with law enforcement, that took place during 1997–2006.
Several were alcohol-related incidents. The last incident took place in 2006, when he
was charged with public swearing/intoxication, to which he pleaded guilty and paid a
fine and costs. Applicant has had no additional incidents since 2006.
The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted, in part, a history of excessive alcohol
consumption. The history includes the several alcohol-related incidents involving law
enforcement and treatment for his excessive use of alcohol in 2006. Applicant has
abstained from alcohol since 2007, and he intends to do so in the future.
 Exhibits A and B. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
3
Two coworkers submitted letters supporting Applicant’s application for a security
clearance.  Both coworkers vouched for Applicant’s work performance and suitability for6
access to classified information. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,8
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating18
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  19
4
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the17
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant18
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  19
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  20
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 21
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 22
5
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
Both the disqualifying and mitigating conditions should be analyzed in light of the
record as a whole. The record here shows Applicant has a history of financial problems
or difficulties as evidenced by the five delinquent debts. Taken together, these
circumstances raise doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and
good judgment. 
Turning first to the disqualifying conditions under ¶ 19 of Guideline F, Applicant’s
history of financial difficulties raises concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within20 21
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to establish the two
disqualifying conditions, and it suggests financial irresponsibility as well.
Under ¶ 20 of Guideline F, there are six mitigating conditions as follows:  22
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 30.23
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 21. 24
 See Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c),  22(b), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(e). 25
 See Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 31(a), 31 (d), 23(a), and 23(b).  26
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9). 27
6
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered, and the most pertinent
here is ¶ 20(d). Applicant mitigated the security concerns based on his good-faith efforts
to repay his overdue creditors. 
The criminal conduct and alcohol consumption issues are discussed together
because the record shows that, for the most part, the two are factually related or
connected to each other.  Under Guideline J, the overall concern is that “criminal activity
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”  Similarly,23
under Guideline G, the overall concern is that “excessive alcohol consumption often
leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”24
Without doubt, Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, mostly alcohol-related
incidents, and his history of excessive alcohol consumption raise security concerns and
justify application of the pertinent disqualifying conditions under each guideline.  The25
record is also clear, however, that Applicant’s last criminal incident took place in
January 2006, more than three years ago, and that he has abstained from alcohol since
January 2007, more than two years ago. This passage of time without recurrence is
evidence of reform and rehabilitation. Given these circumstances, the security concerns
are mitigated.26
To conclude, as discussed in my initial decision, Applicant did not present
sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under
Guideline E based on his false statements. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
nine-factor whole-person concept  was given due consideration. This case is decided27
against Applicant. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.h:  For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline G: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.a–3.e:  For Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 4.a–4.b:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
