  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09067 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant has failed 
to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under illegal drugs and personal 
conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 12, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
illegal drugs and personal conduct.  
 
  On April 22, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 28, 2009. The FORM contained seven 
attachments. On August 6, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on September 5, 2009. As of October 8, 2009, no response had 
been received. On October 9, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
He admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, indicating his illegal drug 
usage occurred in 1994. He also admitted the allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 
1.f. Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b, which related to 
SOR ¶ 1.f, an allegation he admitted. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are 
incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old systems administrator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2005, and is seeking to maintain a secret security clearance 
granted in August 2006. The company’s CEO states Applicant is an outstanding 
member of the technical staff in both dedication and commitment to duty. (Item 5) In 
December 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). 
 
 Applicant used marijuana approximately 30 times during high school. (Item 5) He 
was 16 years old at the time. (Item 5) Applicant stopped using marijuana during his 
senior year in high school. He also admitted using PCP on one occasion and using 
Valium or Percocet on one occasion. (Item 5) 
 
 In March 2007, Applicant purchased some marijuana for $20. (Item 6) In June 
2007, he took the marijuana, along with a pipe in which to smoke it, on a camping trip. 
Applicant smoked it on the trip and offered it to others. A park ranger observed several 
individuals passing around what looked to be a cigarette. (Item 6) When confronted by 
the park ranger, Applicant admitted the marijuana was his. When asked if he had any 
additional marijuana, Applicant turned over a baggie containing approximately one 
ounce of marijuana. (Item 6) Applicant was taken to the park ranger station and 
received a ticket for possession of a controlled substance and possession of drug 
paraphernalia.  
 
3 
 
 
 On February 11, 2008, Applicant entered the Superior Court Drug Diversion 
program, which required at least six months of participation. He was required to 
complete at least 12 psycho-educations groups, a minimum of one random drug screen 
per week, at least one monthly individual session, appear monthly before the Superior 
Court, pay $200 court costs, and complete 18 consecutive weeks of negative drug 
screen results. (Item 5) Applicant paid the $200 and provided a certificate of 
achievement for successfully completing the drug diversion program. The certificate of 
achievement was dated May 27, 2008, which is 15 weeks from entry into the program.  
 
 In a January 2008 security interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), Applicant stated he had obtained the marijuana from a friend as a 
gift or “tip.” Applicant stated he helped set up a friend’s home computer network in 
March 2007. Applicant asserts the friend gave him a small amount of marijuana for his 
assistance. (Item 5) Applicant accepted the marijuana thinking the use of marijuana 
would help him and his wife relax following the February 2007 death of his brother-in-
law killed in an automobile accident. When Applicant returned home, he did not tell his 
wife about the marijuana, placed it in his safe, and forgot about it.  
 
 In June 2007, Applicant and friends of his brother-in-law decided to go on a 
camping trip to remember his brother-in-law. Applicant decided to take the marijuana 
with him on the camping trip. He also brought a pipe with him to smoke the marijuana. 
Applicant told the park ranger he had purchased the ounce of marijuana three months 
earlier and said he was saving it for a special occasion. (item 6)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his use of illegal drugs was an act of stupidity and he 
will not use illegal drugs again because they are illegal and because his family and 
career mean too much to him. (Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,” “illegal drug possession,” and 
“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c) and 
25(g) apply. The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. 
These disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used marijuana, PCP, Percocet, 
and Valium. In August 2006, Applicant was granted a secret clearance. His last use of 
marijuana occurred in June 2007.  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
Clearly Applicant’s Percocet, Valium, PCP, and marijuana usage, which occurred 
more than 13 years ago, when Applicant was in high school, is not recent. During the 
last 13 years, Applicant used marijuana once. That use occurred in June 2007, which 
was approximately 28 months ago. His last usage was isolated, but is neither in the 
distant past nor is it very recent. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because his use of 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
7 
 
 
marijuana while holding a security clearance casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
His abstention from drug use for more than two years, and his recognition of the 
adverse impact on his life of drug abuse, provides some certitude that he will continue 
to abstain from drug use. However, because Applicant chose to have this matter 
handled administratively, I am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or form a 
positive determination as to his truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find 
Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Therefore, I cannot conclude with reasonable 
confidence that his illegal drug possession and use will not recur.  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse illegal 
drugs in the future. During the past 13 years, he has used marijuana once. It has not 
been shown he associates with drug-using associates and contacts. He has abstained 
from drug abuse for more than two years. AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. The marijuana, PCP, and Percocet or Valium were never prescribed 
for him. He did not satisfactorily complete a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements. He did successfully complete the 
drug diversion program even though it required 18 weeks of drug screenings and he 
completed the program in 15 weeks. 
 
Applicant ended his drug abuse in June 2007, and understands the adverse 
results from drug abuse. However, Applicant’s marijuana use after having obtained a 
secret security clearance shows questionable judgment to which none of the mitigating 
conditions are sufficient to mitigate. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government asserts Applicant lied when he told an OPM investigator he had 
been given the marijuana and failed to disclose he had purchased it. It is not important 
to determine whether he purchased the marijuana or if it was given to him. What is 
important is Applicant possessed the marijuana for three months, saving it for use on a 
special occasion. Possessing the marijuana for three months waiting for the proper 
occasion shows questionable judgment and failure to comply with laws making 
8 
 
 
marijuana possession illegal. I find against Applicant for his possession of marijuana 
and not for telling conflicting stories about how he obtained it. 
 
With respect to the personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s marijuana 
use after being granted a clearance (SOR ¶ 1.f), the pertinent disqualifying condition is 
AG ¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule violations and AG ¶ 16(e)(1), which states, “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” 
Certainly, Applicant’s marijuana use while holding a security clearance violates 
important civil and criminal rules in our society, and is conduct a person might wish to 
conceal, as it adversely affects a person’s professional and community standing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
9 
 
 
  
From the record as presented, none of the mitigating conditions apply. There is 
no showing Applicant has made any disclosure, which would eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation or duress. It is noted the personal conduct concerns related to 
his illegal drug use and use while holding a clearance are well known to the 
government. However, his marijuana use after having obtained a secret security 
clearance shows questionable judgment. His use while holding a clearance cannot be 
mitigated at this time because it is too serious and too recent.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence supporting 
approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant first used marijuana and other illegal drugs 
in high school when he was relatively young and immature. He did not use illegal drugs 
for more than 13 years, which shows he has the ability to abstain from marijuana use for 
lengthy periods of time. Applicant’s most recent marijuana use occurred more than two 
years ago. His most recent use was a single event.  
 
There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national 
security. Applicant contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. His 
character and good work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation and 
mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to 
retain his employment after his security clearance was called into question. The 
company’s CEO lauds his dedication, commitment to duty, high moral and ethical 
values, and strong loyalty. Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled 
administratively, I am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or form a positive 
determination as to his truthfulness. 
10 
 
 
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. His 
decision to possess and use marijuana while holding a security clearance was 
knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. This offense shows a serious lack of judgment and a failure 
to abide by the law. His misconduct raises a serious security concern, and a security 
clearance is not warranted at this time. I am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from 
drug use, and avoids future offenses he will eventually have future potential for access 
to classified information. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, illegal drugs:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.e: For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, personal conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
  
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
