                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09463 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for sexual 
behavior and personal conduct. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on September 30, 2005, to request a security clearance required as part of 
his employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On June 30, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Item 1) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
Directive under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct) of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on July 8, 2009. He submitted an Answer signed and 
notarized on July 24, 2009, which included one attached document. He requested a 
decision without a hearing. In his Answer, Applicant denied the Guideline D Concern 
identified in paragraph 1, but admitted to allegation 1.a. He also denied the Concern 
expressed in paragraph 2, Guideline E. He did not respond to allegation 2.a. However, 
this allegation repeats the allegation stated under ¶ 1.a. As Applicant admitted to ¶ 1.a., 
I construe allegation 2.a. to be admitted.  
 
On August 13, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant 
materials (FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary decision to deny 
Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The FORM contained ten 
documents, identified as Items 1 through 10. The FORM and attached Items were 
forwarded to Applicant on August 17, 2009, and he received the package on August 28, 
2009. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to respond. He 
provided a timely response dated September 25, 2009. Department Counsel forwarded 
the response without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 8, 2009, for 
an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old and holds a bachelor’s degree. He has worked for the 
same defense contractor since 1998, and currently holds the position of Electro-
Mechanical Tech II. He is married, with two children and two step-children. In 2007, 
when Applicant committed the cited offenseS, his children ranged in age from three to 
eleven years old. Applicant applied for a security clearance in 2003. It is unclear from 
the record whether or not this clearance was granted, and whether or not it was in effect 
in 2007. The SOR does not allege that the offense occurred while Applicant held a 
security clearance (Items 5, 8). 
 
Between May 1 and May 3, 2007, Applicant drove to retail coffee shops on four 
occasions. On each occasion, he lowered his pants to below his knees, drove to the 
drive-through window, paid for coffee, and left. The female waitresses working at the 
drive-through reported that in each instance he wore a tee-shirt, but no slacks or 
underwear, and his genital area was clearly visible. Applicant stated that he engaged in 
this same behavior four times because he did not receive any reaction and he was 
seeking a reaction from the females (Items 6, 7). 
 
In discussing the circumstances surrounding his offense, Applicant states that 
“this was by far the worst thing I have done in my life.” He notes that he was 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
experiencing a stressful time in his life: his family had moved to a new house, and he 
had the “winter blues.” Although his general practitioner prescribed medication for 
depression and for Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD), Applicant stopped taking both 
medications because of their side effects. At the time that he exposed himself, he was 
not taking medication. (Items 7, 9; Response).  
 
On May 3, 2007, Applicant was arrested at his home and escorted to jail, where 
he remained for several hours. He was charged with four counts of public indecency, a 
misdemeanor (Item 10). In June 2007, he pled “no contest” to two counts, and was 
found guilty; the remaining two counts were dismissed. Applicant was sentenced to 60 
days in jail (54 suspended). He paid approximately $800 in fines, and was required to 
avoid the stores where he had exposed himself. He was ordered to have a mental 
health assessment and participate in any recommended treatment. Applicant was also 
sentenced to two years of Community Control, under which he was required to report in 
every month. The Community Control ended in June 2009 (Items 6, 7, 10; Response). 
 
From May 7 to September 14, 2007, Applicant attended nine therapy sessions 
with a clinical psychologist. He was diagnosed with Adjustment Disorder and Adult 
Antisocial Behavior. The therapy focused on his strained marriage, the effects of his 
antisocial act on his marriage, and how to reduce risk for future incidents. His therapist 
noted that Applicant completed the treatment goals, but did not provide information 
about the causes of Applicant's behavior, the life stresses that may have been involved, 
actions to avoid recurrence, or any prognosis about the likelihood of future similar 
conduct (Items 7, 9). 
 
Applicant's arrest was publicized in a newspaper story and television reports. His 
statements as to who is aware of his offense are somewhat contradictory. Applicant 
reported in December 2008, that his wife, parents, and in-laws know of his conviction, 
but his children, friends, and co-workers, other than his supervisor and company 
administrators, do not know,. However, in his Answer of July 2009, Applicant stated that 
his children “know a little about what happened,” and his manager told him that “some 
people” saw the news report. However, Applicant has never been approached by a co-
worker about the offenses (Items 6, 7; Answer and Attachment; Response). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guidelines D and E. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern under Guideline D: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 Under Guideline D, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: AG ¶ 13(a) 
(sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been 
prosecuted) and AG ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack 
of discretion or judgment). The evidence is insufficient to support application of AG ¶ 
13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress). Adult members of Applicant's family are aware of the offense, 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
as are his supervisor and administrators. It appears that some co-workers are aware, 
and his children have limited knowledge of it. Finally, Applicant's conduct was the 
subject of newspaper and television reports. It is unlikely that he could be coerced to 
provide classified information based on this offense. However, Applicant did commit a 
criminal sexual offense, and he performed it in order to provoke a reaction from female 
members of the public. The crime, by its nature, is a public offense. Such conduct 
demonstrates a complete lack of discretion. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 13(a) and AG 
¶ 13(d) apply. 
 
 Two mitigating conditions are relevant: AG ¶ 14(a) (the behavior occurred prior to 
or during adolescence and there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar 
nature) and AG ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Applicant’s 
behavior occurred not when he was an immature adolescent, but when he was 30 years 
old, married, and the father of pre-adolescent children. AG ¶ 14(a) does not apply. 
Applicant receives some mitigation under AG ¶ 14(b) because his conduct was 
infrequent, and there is no evidence of similar conduct. However, he committed the 
offense approximately two-and-one-half years ago, which is not distant in time. In 
addition, Applicant's conduct appears to have been in response to stressful events in his 
life. It is likely that such events will continue at various points in the future. It cannot be 
confidently predicted that Applicant will not act out again, especially since his therapist 
provided no prognosis on which to determine the likelihood of recurrence. On the whole, 
the limited favorable mitigation under AG ¶ 14(b) is insufficient to outweigh the 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a. under Guideline E cross-references the 2007 offense cited under 
Guideline D. AG 16 (c) applies (credible adverse information in several adjudicative 
issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information). Applicant's decision 
to expose his genitals to unknown females, in an effort to ”get a reaction,” shows 
 
6 
 
 
extremely poor judgment. Applicant repeated the action four times, each time showing 
untrustworthiness and willingness to violate the law.  
 
 As to mitigation under Guideline E, AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) cannot be applied. A little more 
than two years have passed since Applicant exposed himself which, as discussed 
previously, is not distant in time. Moreover, although the criminal offense was a 
misdemeanor, it cannot be taken lightly or considered minor.  
 
 Some mitigation is available under AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged 
the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive 
steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur). 
Applicant admits that his conduct demonstrated poor judgment, and he has attended 
therapy. However, the therapy lasted only nine sessions. As discussed under Guideline 
D, the record contains no evidence as to the stressors that caused his behavior, 
methods to prevent it from recurring, or a prognosis as to whether it is likely to recur. 
Without such information, mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d) is insufficient to outweigh 
Applicant's disqualifying conduct. His behavior demonstrates a willingness to place his 
marriage and family relationships in jeopardy, and to break the law, in order to satisfy 
his own desires. It casts doubt on his trustworthiness and judgment.  
 
Whole Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant was not an adolescent, but a 30-year-old husband and father when he 
deliberately exposed himself to female waitresses at a coffee shop. In Applicant's favor, 
he recognizes the poor choice he made when he committed the offense, and there is no 
evidence that he engaged in such conduct since 2007. However, these facts are 
insufficient to mitigate his conduct.  
 
Although Applicant contends that he is not vulnerable to coercion because of the 
publicity about his offenses, vulnerability is not the only basis on which an Applicant's 
behavior is judged. Judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are also key elements in 
determining an Applicant's suitability to hold a security clearance. Moreover, those who 
hold security clearances enter into a fiduciary relationship with the government which is 
predicated on trust. Any criminal conduct by an applicant raises serious doubts about 
his or her trustworthiness. Here, Applicant showed a willingness to break the law, and to 
violate the trust of his family, to satisfy his own needs. Such behavior raises questions 
as to his trustworthiness and good judgment.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts raised by criminal sexual conduct. 
Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 2.a    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
