 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10498 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 28, 
 
2 
 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 4, 2009, scheduling the hearing for 
August 19, 2009. The case was reassigned to me on August 12, 2009. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through O, which were received without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 13 pages of documents, 
which were marked AE P through V and admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on September 8, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
renew his security clearance. He served in the military from 1992 through 2001, and 
was honorably discharged. He has worked for his current employer since December 
2007. He has been steadily employed since he discharged from the military. He was 
married from 1999 until his divorce in 2000. He married again in 2003, separated in 
2004, and divorced in 2006. He married again in 2007. He has primary joint custody of 
his six-year-old child from his second marriage.1  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his second wife’s spending, his 
separation and divorce, her failure to pay her share of the marital debt, and the costly 
legal fees incident to a protracted custody battle. While they were married, he agreed to 
cosign loans for two new cars for her, even though he had two older cars and a 
motorcycle that were owned outright. One of his older cars was being restored and was 
inoperable, and the other car had mechanical problems. She wanted to have an extra 
car available for his use in case his older cars broke down. She did not want him 
borrowing her car. She took both cars in the divorce, and both cars ended up being 
repossessed.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts, which includes two debts reduced to 
judgments. The debts were listed on credit reports dated July 22, 2008, and May 13, 
2009. Applicant admitted owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He admitted in part and 
denied in part the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. He denied owing the 
remaining debts.3 Individual debts are addressed below. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-26, 31, 40-42; GE 1, 2; AE L-N. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-35, 39-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE L-N. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $19,473 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The 
debt was for the deficiency owed on a car loan after the car was repossessed. This was 
one of the car loans that he cosigned for his second wife. Applicant stated that he plans 
on including this and his other debts in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, as discussed below.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges an unpaid judgment awarded against Applicant on behalf of 
an insurance company in the amount of $22,000. Applicant did not deny that a judgment 
was awarded against him. He was in a car accident. He stated the driver of the other 
car slammed on her brakes when her dog jumped in her lap. He hit her car when she 
cut him off. He provided the information to his insurance company, which stated they 
were denying the other driver’s claim. Applicant stated he was sued by her insurance 
company while he was out of town. A default judgment was awarded against him for 
$22,000. In June 2009, the balance on the judgment, counting interest and fees, was 
$23,932.5   
 
 Applicant admitted owing the unpaid judgment of $1,302 to a law firm, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. He stated this debt was for the attorney handling his divorce. He was 
dissatisfied with his representation and disputed the bill. The balance on the judgment 
was $1,539 in June 2009.6 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege past-due debts of $465 and $567 owed to the same 
credit card company. Applicant testified that both debts were “current and paid off in 
full.” After the hearing, he submitted his account statements from August 2009. One 
account listed a balance of $420, which was above the credit limit of $300, and included 
a late fee of $29. The second account listed a balance of $559, which was above the 
credit limit of $400, and included a return item charge of $25, an over limit fee of $25, 
and a late fee of $25.7   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a past-due auto loan with a balance of $11,000. The May 13, 
2009 credit report lists the debt as $414 past due. Applicant admitted that he fell behind 
on the debt, but he contacted the creditor and worked out a plan to bring the loan 
current. He submitted a letter from the creditor dated August 21, 2009. The letter stated 
that his account balance was $10,470 and “[t]he account has a present due date of 
8/01/09.”8   
 
 In June 2009, Applicant paid the delinquent debt of $299 owed to a credit union.  
This debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g.9   
                                                          
4 Tr. at 26-28, 32-33, 46; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 46-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE I. 
 
6 Tr. at 46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE J 
 
7 Tr. at 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE S, T. 
 
8 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE V. 
 
9 Tr. at 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE G. 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a delinquent debt of $396 to a collection company. Applicant 
submitted a letter from the collection company indicating that a debt being collected on 
behalf of a telecommunications company had been settled. SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a 
delinquent debt of $76 to the same telecommunications company. There is insufficient 
evidence for a determination that these represent two distinct debts.10   
 
 Applicant admitted and denied the debts of $7,265, $4,152, and $980, as alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. He admitted owing the two credit card debts of $7,265 and 
$4,152. He denied the two allegations because he stated his second wife was supposed 
to pay the debts. He plans on including these debts in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He 
admitted owing the $980 cell phone bill. He denied the allegation because he stated his 
second wife’s mother ran the bill up. His second wife agreed to pay the bill but did not. 
He stated that he had an agreement with the creditor to settle the debt, and he made 
one payment of about $176. He stopped making payments on the settlement because 
his bankruptcy attorney advised him to leave the debt for his bankruptcy plan. Applicant 
was asked to provide proof of the payment in his post-hearing submission, but no proof 
of that payment was provided.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a delinquent debt of $295 owed to a collection company on 
behalf of a cable television and internet provider company. Applicant submitted letters 
from the collection company and the cable company indicating the account was paid in 
2005. The cable company noted that “the monetary balance on the account was due to 
an incorrect disconnect date on [company’s] part.” The collection company “investigated 
[his] dispute.” Based upon their investigation, the company closed the account and 
notified the credit bureaus to delete the account from his credit report.12   
 
 A judgment of $10,377 was awarded against Applicant and his second wife on 
behalf of an automobile finance company in 2005. The judgment was for the deficiency 
owed on a car loan after the car was repossessed. This was the second car loan that 
Applicant cosigned for his second wife. The balance on the judgment was $16,257 in 
June 2009. This debt was not alleged in the SOR.13   
 
 To summarize Applicant’s debts, he paid or settled two debts totaling $695 (¶¶ 
1.g and 1.h); he successfully disputed a $295 debt that was paid in 2005 (¶ 1.m); he 
disputed a $76 debt as a duplicate debt(¶ 1.l); he is paying three debts with balances 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. at 36, 44-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, H. 
 
11 Tr. at 45, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
12 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, C-F. 
 
13 Tr. at 26-28, 32-35; AE K. This judgment will not be used for disqualification purposes. It will be 
considered in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, 
and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
 
 
5 
 
totaling $11,449, which were past-due at some point (¶¶ 1.d, 1,e, and 1.f); and he did 
not provide proof of payments on the remaining six unpaid judgments and delinquent 
debts totaling $57,341 (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k). He also has an unpaid 
judgment of $16,257 that was not alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s total debt, which 
includes debts that may not be past due and a debt that was not alleged, is 
approximately $85,000. 
 
 Applicant contracted with an attorney in June 2009, to file a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy on his behalf. Applicant submitted a Chapter 13 plan worksheet. The 
worksheet listed $2,600 in attorney fees and the total amount of non-priority unsecured 
debt at $55,862. The worksheet did not list individual creditors. The worksheet proposed 
alternate plans in which Applicant would either pay $210 per month for 13 months, 
followed by payments of $7 per month for 47 months, or he would pay $210 per month 
for 15 months. The worksheet called for $200 per month for 13 months, or $2,600, 
would be paid to his attorney. It called for $300 to be paid to his non-priority unsecured 
debt. The monthly car loan payment of $420 to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f would be paid 
outside his plan. The plan has not been approved by the bankruptcy court. Applicant 
completed the financial counseling required by the bankruptcy court.14    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 36-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE O, U. 
 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
7 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant paid, settled, disputed, or brought current several debts. He retained 
an attorney to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on his behalf, but the plan has not been 
approved by the bankruptcy court. He still owes more than $57,000 in unpaid judgments 
and delinquent debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his second wife’s spending, his 
separation and divorce, her failure to pay her share of the marital debt, and the costly 
legal fees incident to a protracted custody battle. These all qualify as conditions that 
were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant cosigned for two car loans 
when he was married, even though he had two older cars and a motorcycle for his use. 
That is not responsible conduct. He paid two of the debts listed in the SOR, totaling 
$695. Another debt was successfully disputed as paid in 2005. He is in the process of 
filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which is a legal means of addressing one’s burdensome 
debt. The plan has not been approved, and he has not started the payments to the 
trustee. He has not submitted sufficient information for a determination that his actions 
regarding his finances have been completely responsible. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.   
 
 Applicant has received some financial counseling. His Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
plan has not been approved by the court, and he has not established a track record of 
payments to the trustee. It is too early in the process for a determination that his 
financial problems are resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant paid two debts. Three debts that were listed as past due are being 
paid. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to those five debts. Those payments do not support a 
finding that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve all his delinquent debts.15 AG ¶ 
20(d) is not applicable to the unpaid debts. 
 
 Applicant successfully disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m. The debt in ¶ 1.l is a 
duplicate of another debt that was paid. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those two debts.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that financial concerns are still present despite the presence 
of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
                                                          
15 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No.  99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s honorable military service and his steady employment record. Many of his 
delinquent debts can be traced to his second wife and their extended custody battle. He 
paid two debts totaling $695 and is in the process of filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His 
bankruptcy plan has not been approved by the court, and he has not begun making 
payments to the trustee. He still owes more than $57,000 in unpaid judgments and 
delinquent debts. I am also concerned about how Applicant handled his past-due debts. 
He testified that his debts of $465 and $567 were “current and paid off in full.” The 
account statements submitted after the hearing showed both accounts with balances 
over the credit limit and included late fees, a return item charge, and an over limit fee. 
Applicant has not established a track record of financially responsible conduct. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1h:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
