 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10219 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 11, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 
 
2 
 
24, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 3, 2009, scheduling the hearing 
for August 19, 2009. The case was reassigned to me on August 12, 2009. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted six pages of 
documents, which were marked AE E through I and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 8, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2008. He is a graduate of a bible college and is an 
ordained minister. He was married from 1988 until his divorce in 2007. He married again 
in 2007. He has three children, ages 19, 17, and 7. He also has a 16-year-old 
stepchild.1  
 
 Applicant worked for an automotive company in a different state than his current 
residence from 1988 to 2008. He was also serving as a pastor at a church. His first wife 
handled their finances during his marriage. After they separated in January 2007, he 
discovered that they had extensive debt. The court held Applicant responsible for all 
their debt. He was also ordered to pay $1,285 per month in child support. Applicant 
indicated that he was unable to maintain his child support, mortgage, and make the 
payments on their accumulated debts. The automotive company notified Applicant that 
his job was being eliminated. The company provided him with a severance package. 
Applicant indicated that he did not recall the amount of the package, but it came to 
“about $50,000 after taxes and everything else.” Applicant stated that some of the 
money went to dental work for the children, child support, and other expenses. 
Applicant’s current job pays about $2,500 less per month than his job at the automotive 
company.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling about $68,391. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained on July 12, 2008 and April 29, 2009. Applicant admitted 
to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, and 1.n. He denied owing 
the remaining debts. The total amount owed on the eight debts that Applicant admitted 
owing is about $53,502. He also admitted to SOR ¶ 1.o, which alleged that his personal 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B-D. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-20, 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
financial statement, executed on January 5, 2009, reflected a negative monthly net 
remainder.3  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege delinquent debts of $327 and $164 to the same utility 
company, as collected by two different collection companies. Applicant admitted owing 
the first debt and denied owing the second debt. There is insufficient evidence for a 
determination that these represent two distinct debts. When he responded to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he sent the utility company a check for $327. At his hearing, 
Applicant admitted that he never sent the company a check. He stated that he made out 
a check to the utility company for $327. When he called the company for an address, 
the company told him that the debt was transferred to a collection company.4 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege delinquent debts of $4,707 and $5,593 to the same 
collection company. Applicant denied owing the debts because he stated that he did not 
recognize the company. The debts are listed on the 2009 credit report but not the 2008 
report. The credit report does not list the original creditor(s). The $5,593 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e appears to be the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. There is insufficient 
evidence for a determination that the $4,707 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d represents a 
distinct debt not alleged in another SOR allegation.5  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the delinquent debt of $1,058 owed to a collection 
company on behalf of an automobile tire company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He entered 
a payment plan with the collection company in December 2008, in which he would settle 
the debt with six monthly payments of $158. He made the first payment in January 
2009. He thought he made a second payment, but apparently it was sent to his credit 
management company. He settled the debt through the credit management company 
on August 31, 2009.6 
 
 Applicant initially denied owing the delinquent debt of $128 to a 
telecommunications company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He contacted the collection 
company handling the debt after the hearing. He paid the debt with a $134 payment on 
August 21, 2009.7 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $1,262 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k because 
he did not recognize the creditor. The SOR abbreviated the name of the creditor. When 
provided the complete name of the creditor, Applicant admitted he had a delinquent 
                                                          
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-33; Applicant’s response to SOR. Applicant’s inaccurate statement will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It will be considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility; in the application of 
mitigating conditions; and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
5 Tr. at 33-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 21-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE F-I. 
 
7 Tr. at 38-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
account owed to the creditor. He listed the creditor under its full name when he 
submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in July 2008.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a delinquent debt of $3,035 owed to a financial institution. 
Applicant denied owing the debt because he did not recognize the company. The debt 
is listed on the 2008 credit report but not the 2009 report.9 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the remaining delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He 
contracted with a credit management company to negotiate settlements on his behalf. 
He stopped being actively involved with the company because their monthly payment 
schedule was too high. He has not received formal financial counseling, but he has 
received advice from friends. A friend provided him with literature from a well-known 
financial and credit advisor. Applicant indicated that he plans on paying all his debts, but 
does not have the income to do so at this time. His friends have recommended that he 
file bankruptcy, but he does not believe that would be the morally right thing to do. He 
stated that he is saving $20 from his paycheck every two weeks to pay his debts. He 
plans on following the financial expert’s advice, which is to pay the smallest debt first 
and then move to the next debt. He has recently reconnected with the credit 
management company to negotiate settlements for his debts. Applicant’s oldest child 
married in January 2009, which should eliminate child support for that child and lower 
his total child support payments. He is in the process of petitioning the court to lower his 
child support obligation. When that occurs, he will be able to put more funds toward his 
delinquent debts. He is in somewhat better financial shape than when he submitted his 
personal financial statement, but he admitted that his finances remain very tight.10 
 
 Applicant submitted letters from his supervisor and another pastor. The 
supervisor attested to his superior job performance, honesty, work ethic, dedication, and 
integrity. He recommended Applicant for a security clearance. The pastor has known 
Applicant his entire life. He stated Applicant is a man of character and integrity.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 40-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
9 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
10 Tr. at 20-29, 42-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
11 AE A, D. 
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved most of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his ex-wife’s mismanagement of 
their finances, his separation and divorce, and the loss of his job at the automotive 
company. These all qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has made minimal payments on his delinquent debts. He 
 
7 
 
received a severance package from the automotive company. He stated that he did not 
recall the amount of the package, but it came to “about $50,000 after taxes and 
everything else.” He did not fully explain what he did with that money. Without a better 
accounting of where those funds went, I am unable to make a finding that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant has received some financial counseling, but there are not clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is 
partially applicable. He has paid several debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to those debts. 
Those payments do not support a finding that he made a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve all his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to the unpaid debts. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.l. Three 
of the debts may be duplicates of other debts, and the fourth debt does not appear on 
the most recent credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is also an ordained minister. He is 
highly regarded personally and professionally. Between his long hours at the automotive 
company and as a pastor, he placed his finances in the hands of his wife. She 
mismanaged their finances, which he did not completely discover until after their 
separation and divorce. The court ordered him to pay the marital debt and child support. 
He was unable to keep up the payments on his child support, mortgage, and other bills. 
He then lost his 20-year job at the automotive company because of downsizing. He 
 
8 
 
moved to another state and accepted a job making substantially less money. All these 
events contributed to his financial problems. The automotive company gave him a 
severance package that came to about $50,000 after taxes. He stated that some of the 
money went to dental work for the children, child support, and other expenses, but did 
not provide any kind of breakdown as to how much was paid and to whom. He has 
made minimal payments on his debts. Without a better accounting of the $50,000, I 
cannot find that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. I am also troubled 
by his inaccurate statement in his response to the SOR that he sent a creditor a check 
for $327, when he had not. Accounting for the paid and disputed debts, Applicant still 
owes mores than $53,000 in delinquent debt. He stated that he can only afford to use 
$20 from his paycheck every two weeks for his delinquent debts. He remains financially 
overextended.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
