                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11748 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Paul T. Krispin, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 29, 2008, Applicant1 submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On April 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 26, 2009, 
and I received the case assignment on May 27, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
1 The SOR spelling of Applicant’s name is incorrect.  Applicant corrected it on the record, and his SF 86 contains 
the correct spelling, which is used in the caption of this Decision. 
 
2 
 
 
on June 5, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 23, 2009. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C.  Department Counsel did not 
object to Exhibits A and B, but did object to Exhibit C because it was not translated into 
English.  I granted Applicant additional time to obtain a certified translation, which he did 
on July 2, 2009.  Department Counsel argued in his transmittal memorandum that little 
or no weight should be given to Exhibit C as translated because of enumerated 
discrepancies as set forth in the memorandum. I admitted the exhibit into evidence. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 6, 2009. The record closed on 
July 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. 14, 15) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence and were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 4. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.f of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant is 49 years old, married, and has two children born in the United 
States. He owns a home in the United States, and a gas station with a partner.  
Applicant was born in Iraq, and came to the United States in May 1997 with his wife.  
He became a U.S. citizen in August 2006. He thinks his former Iraqi citizenship was 
renounced when he obtained U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s wife was born in Iraq. She is 
not a U.S. citizen, but is a resident alien and citizen of Iraq. Her parents and siblings are 
U.S. residents. Her father is a U.S. citizen, but her mother is not a citizen. (Tr. 17-19, 
25, 39, 45, 93-95; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iraq.  His mother is a retired 
teacher and receives an Iraqi government pension.  His mother had cancer a few years 
ago when Applicant was working for a government contractor in Iraq.  When he called 
her once or twice a week to inquire about her health, he told his mother he was calling 
from California.  He spoke with his father at the same time.  Two of Applicant’s sisters 
also live in his parent’s house in Iraq. He spoke with them at the same time.  Applicant 
spoke with his parents a few days prior to this hearing.  At the present time, he speaks 
with his parents on his mother’s cell phone about once a month.  Applicant describes 
his relationship with his mother as “very good.” (Tr. 27-31, 46-52; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant has one brother living in Iraq.  A second brother died in 2008, but 
Applicant did not attend his funeral in Iraq because of the restrictions on his job with the 
government contractor. His deceased brother was a police officer in Iraq. His living 
brother is older than Applicant, and is a citizen of Iraq. He drives a taxicab for a living, 
and has a wife and child. Applicant last saw his brother in 2007. Applicant speaks with 
his brother frequently and has a “good relationship” with him. (Tr. 53-60; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq.  He telephoned 
them the week before the hearing, and speaks with them monthly. The older sister lives 
with his parents and is not employed. Applicant describes his relationship with this sister 
as “very close.” Applicant has a younger sister who is married to a man who owns a 
bakery. This sibling relationship is also close. (Tr. 61-66; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant has about 15 aunts and seven uncles in Iraq. He also has many 
cousins living in Iraq. Applicant has a very good relationship with all these family 
members in Iraq. Applicant describes it as a close knit family. (Tr. 66-68, 88; Exhibits 1-
3) 
 
 Even though the SF 86 states Applicant bought a house in Iraq during 2002, he 
admitted at the hearing the actual purchase was made in 2004 through a local Iraq 
attorney.  Applicant used $38,000 obtained from the sale of his wife’s gold jewelry and 
other gold objects. He allowed his parents to live there for free from 2004 to 2006.  Then 
he permitted a poor family to live in his house without rent payments from 2006 to 2008.  
Applicant transferred ownership of the house to his wife in March 2009 after some 
friends told him to sell or transfer the house if he wanted to be hired by a government 
contractor and obtain a security clearance.  Applicant declared in March 2009 on his 
interrogatories that he owned the Iraqi house and its value was about $50,000. The 
translation of the deed, or “temporary processing form,” as it is labeled in the document 
submitted by Applicant, contains several illegible entries, and lists three persons who 
are to receive shares in the house. It is unclear from the document who owns the 
house, particularly because Applicant’s name does not appear on the translated 
document.  I do not give this exhibit or its translation any weight.  Applicant intends to 
return to Iraq someday in the future and live in that house.  Applicant will reclaim Iraqi 
citizenship when he returns to Iraq to live. (Tr. 32, 33, 37, 68-86, 91; Exhibits 1, C) 
 
 Applicant travelled to Iraq in 2001 with his wife. He travelled there in 2007 alone. 
He visited his aunts and uncles on that later visit, in addition to other relatives.  
Applicant stayed about 45 days on each visit. He resided with his parents on each trip. 
(Tr. 83-88; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant submitted a statement from his supervisor about his employment since 
2008, which was described as exemplary. She characterized Applicant as a reliable and 
trustworthy employee. Applicant submitted another person’s statement about his 
expertise in translations which aided the efforts the company was making in Iraq.  
Applicant worked there from July to October 2008. Applicant also submitted a certificate 
 
4 
 
 
of achievement for his efforts from November 2008 to January 2009 from a military 
officer involved in certain activities in Iraq. (Tr. 20; Exhibits A and B)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Iraq is a Middle Eastern country 
with 27 million people. In 2003, the United States led a United Nations coalition to 
remove Saddam Hussein, a long-serving dictator, from power in Iraq. A parliamentary 
democracy was created pursuant to a new 2005 constitution. After free elections in 
2006, Iraq’s new government took office. The Parliament was elected for a four-year 
term. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq had much violence, perpetrated 
by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous attacks and kidnappings 
targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis.  
Although the new governmental has taken aggressive action against terrorists, the 
threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high, as do human rights abuses. Terrorist groups 
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.  For the past 
18 months, the large increase in U.S. combat troops in Iraq has substantially reduced 
violence. These troops were aided by Iraqi soldiers and Sunni local forces that formerly 
supported the Al Qaeda insurrection. In Northern Iraq, the Kurdish local government 
forces maintain a more peaceful environment for the residents than elsewhere in Iraq. 
(Exhibit 4) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person” concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  The following four disqualifying conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
 
6 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s wife and parents are citizens of Iraq. His three siblings, fifteen aunts, 
seven uncles, and numerous cousins live in Iraq and are citizens of that country.  
Applicant has at least monthly telephone contact with his parents, siblings, and other 
relatives. Applicant described his relationships with his family members as close and 
very good. He owns real estate in Iraq valued at $50,000. All of these connections 
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion, particularly because of Applicant’s stated intention to return to Iraq in the 
future and live in the house he purchased in 2004 with his wife’s gold. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
mitigating conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
   
 Applicant’s relationship with his family living in Iraq is close.  Terrorism remains a 
concern there as the country rebuilds after the Hussein era and the past six years of 
instability.  Applicant’s sister is a business owner, and he owns real estate in Iraq.  With 
these connections, Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between 
his family’s interests, the Iraq government’s interests, and the interests of the United 
States.  This concern is heightened because Applicant intends to return to live in Iraq in 
his $50,000 house.  AG ¶ 8 (a) does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has a conflict of interest between his loyalty to family and real estate in 
Iraq, and his loyalty to the United States. He has only been in the United States for 12 
years, compared to 37 years in Iraq. He has not established significant connections to 
the United States to balance his strong connections to Iraq. Applicant also has close 
familial connections to his numerous relatives in Iraq, speaking with them monthly. It is 
not clear that Applicant will resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
AG ¶ 8 (b) does not apply. 
 
 The Directive clearly states any doubt in security clearance cases must be 
resolved in favor of national security. I have great doubts about Applicant based on his 
real estate in Iraq and the murky alleged transaction with his wife to transfer title to her 
made this year. Applicant also wants to return to Iraq to live, and this declaration 
strengthens the doubt about him under AG ¶ 2(b), and it clearly applies here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person” concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, and 
knowingly purchased property in Iraq with the intention of making it his home in the 
future.  While he became a U.S. citizen in 2006, his connections to Iraq remain strong 
and continuing. He diminished his credibility by his conflicting statements about the title 
to his Iraqi house. The transfer of title to his wife in March 2009 seems to be a paper 
transaction designed to obfuscate the true ownership of the house in an attempt to 
obtain a security clearance. Applicant’s consistent contact with his family members in 
Iraq, which has not altered over time, including up to the time of the hearing, shows 
voluntary actions and no behavior changes. These actions will continue and create 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.   
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his foreign influence. I 
conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
