                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-10162 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On June 1, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised. The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
 
1  Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 29, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 17, 2009, was provided to her by letter 
dated August 19, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on August 21, 2009. She was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did submit additional material in response to the 
FORM within the time period of 30 days after receipt of copy of the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on September 30, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.n. and 1.q. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.o. 
and 1.p. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old timekeeper/labor specialist.2 She attended community 
college from January 1999 to May 2002, and was awarded an associate’s degree in 
May 2002. She continued her education and attended a university from August 2002 to 
August 2005, and was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in August 2005. 
 
Applicant married in October 1997 and divorced in July 2005, and her file does 
not reflect that she has any dependents. She did not serve in the U.S. military. Her file 
does not contain any adverse information relating to police involvement. For example, 
she has never been charged with a felony, any firearms or explosives offense(s), and 
does not have any currently pending charges. She has never been charged with any 
offenses related to alcohol or drugs. There is no evidence that she has abused alcohol 
or drugs. She has not been arrested for or charged with any other misdemeanor-level 
offenses. She has worked for the same employer, a defense contractor, since 
November 2007. Applicant seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her 
employment. 
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists 16 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $29,316. In addition, Applicant’s February 25, 2009, Personal Financial 
Statement (PFS) indicates her monthly expenses exceed her monthly income. Her PFS 
does not address repayment of the delinquent debts set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.e. 
 
 2 Item 4 (March 2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
and1.g. to 1.p.3 The 16 delinquent SOR debts consist of one judgment and her 
remaining debts are collection and charged off accounts.  
 
In her July 10, 2008, Personal Subject Interview (PSI), Applicant admits that she 
“.  .  .  was a full time student and was unable to find employment while attending school 
and simply got behind on her financial obligation[s].”4 Applicant further states in her PSI 
that she “.  .  . is expecting to establish payment arrangements for any and all 
outstanding financial obligations,” and states with her new job and better pay she 
believes she will be able to resolve her financial obligations.5 
 
The only documentation provided by Applicant to demonstrate that she has a 
payment plan arrangement in place for SOR ¶ 1.f.; however, Applicant has not provided 
any proof that she has actually made payments under that arrangement.6 Applicant has 
failed to provide any documentation demonstrating that she has either satisfied or 
established payment arrangements for the remainder of her debts. While some of her 
debts are not listed on her more recent credit reports, Applicant must demonstrate that 
she has resolved her debts.7 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she stated: 
 
I have attached some documents to this letter which show my effort in 
trying to take care of my debts. I am still working on getting in touch with 
the rest of my creditors, even though it has been difficult to get hold of 
some [of] these creditors, hence [I am] unable to locate some [of] my 
accounts. It is my deepest desire to get this issue resolved. 
 
The documents she attached consisted of a letter dated September 4, 2009 from 
a debt reduction program. Included among her documents were four letters to creditors 
from the debt reduction program advising the creditors not to call the Applicant. 
Applicant offered no evidence in her FORM response that demonstrated any of the 
debts alleged had been resolved. 
 
 
 
 
3Items 1 and 6. 
 
4 Item 5. 
  
5 Id. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
7 See ISCR case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (The Board has previously noted 
that it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation regarding satisfaction of 
individual debts.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
5 
 
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, in her 
response to DOHA interrogatories, and in her SOR response. Applicant’s SOR listed 16 
debts including a judgment and 15 collection and charged off accounts totaling 
approximately $29,316. Her financial difficulties extended over several years and 
continue today. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because she did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her delinquent 
debts. Her delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because she did not establish that her financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether she is fully committed to resolving her delinquent SOR 
debts and is making adequate steps to do so. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because she 
did not provide any documentation disputing any of the SOR debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by what 
she described as her inability to find employment while attending school, which caused 
her to fall behind on her debts. However, she has not provided sufficient evidence to 
establish that she acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to her 
delinquent SOR debts since obtaining her current job in November 2007.8  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant consulted a company offering a debt 
reduction program; however, this did not occur until long after she received her SOR. 
Furthermore, there is no record evidence establishing that her debts are resolved or 
under control. There is no record evidence that Applicant has paid, started payment 
plans, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. She did not provide 
specific timelines for setting up payment arrangements of any SOR debts. These are 
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
some initial, positive “indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” 
She has admitted her responsibility for most of the SOR debts and promised to 
eventually resolve them. She established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because 
she showed some good faith9 in the resolution of her SOR debts by admitting 
responsibility for most of her SOR debts.  
 
Applicant denied responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o. and 1.p. for $473 and 
$110, respectively. She claimed that she made a payment arrangement with these 
creditors, but as noted, she did not provide any documentation that she has actually 
made payments under that arrangement.   
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve her delinquent debts. Her submitted documentation regarding her 
recent enrollment in a debt reduction program leaves too many questions unanswered. 
Her steps are simply inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of her clearance. Applicant deserves substantial credit for volunteering to 
support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense contractor. There is 
no evidence that she has a criminal record or has ever violated security. There is every 
indication that she is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, her 
employer, and that she is an honorable person. She does not abuse alcohol or illegal 
drugs. She has never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse 
circumstances. Her file does not contain any adverse information relating to police 
involvement. She deserves some credit for enrolling in a debt reduction program, but 
documentation presented is inadequate to demonstrate financial responsibility. 
Cumulatively, these factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial. Failure to pay or resolve her just debts is not prudent or responsible. 
Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. She began to have financial 
difficulties several years ago, when multiple debts became delinquent. In February 
2009, she responded to DOHA interrogatories, and June 2009, she responded to the 
SOR. She had ample opportunity to contact more of her SOR creditors and to make 
greater progress in the resolution of her SOR debts. She did not pay, start payments, 
dispute, or otherwise resolve any SOR debts. She made insufficient progress to resolve 
her delinquent debts, even though she had steady employment and ample opportunity 
to contact her creditors and provide documentation. She was on clear notice from her 
receipt of DOHA interrogatories and even more so after she received the SOR that she 
needed to show substantial progress in the resolution of her delinquent debts; however, 
she did not provide documentation showing her efforts to accomplish this security 
responsibility.    
   
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the 
government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
