                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-11140 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on June 
6, 2008. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant an 
undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The SOR was mailed to Applicant on June 4, 2009, 
and it is assumed this is the date of the SOR. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 10, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 26, 2009. She admitted three 
allegations under Guideline F, but did not respond to the fourth allegation. Since 
Applicant did not respond to the allegation, it is considered a denial of the allegation. 
She requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on July 17, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on July 24, 
1 
 
2 
 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 13, 2009, for a hearing on August 
31, 2009. Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on August 19, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The government offered four exhibits, marked Government 
Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant 
submitted nineteen exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through S, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit 
additional documents. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on September 
8, 2009. Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on August 19, 2009. Applicant is 
entitled to 15 days notice of hearing (Directive E3.1.8). Applicant discussed with 
Department Counsel the hearing date of August 31, 2009, prior to the Notice of Hearing 
being mailed so actual notice was given more than 15 days prior to the hearing. 
However, Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing only 13 days prior to the hearing. If 
there was an issue on notice, Applicant waived the 15 days notice requirement (Tr. 6-8). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted three of the four allegations in 
response to the SOR, but admitted all of the debts at the hearing.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old high school graduate who has been a benefits 
examiner for a defense contractor for over two years. She is a single mother raising a 
12-year-old son. She has also completed some courses at a technical school. (Tr. 14-
18, Gov. Ex. 1, Questionnaire for Public Trust Position, dated June 6, 2008).  
 
 Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 4, dated June 24, 2008, and Gov. Ex. 5, dated March 7, 
2009) listed for Applicant a delinquent debt of $2,295 in collection for a department 
store (SOR 1.a); a delinquent credit card debt in collection for $10,920 (SOR 1.b); 
another delinquent credit card debt in collection for $4,396 (SOR 1.c); and a delinquent 
credit card in collection for $5,435 (SOR 1.d). The total debt for the four credit cards is 
$23,045.  
 
 Applicant gave birth to her child in July 1997, when she was 18 years old shortly 
after graduating from high school. Applicant had been accepted at a technical school so 
she started classes at the technical school in September 1997. She worked full-time at 
night to earn about $1,100 monthly income for herself and her child. Since she was a 
single mother, she lived with her parents who assisted with the care of the child but 
charged her rent of half of her pay. She also had to purchase food and supplies for 
herself and the child. Her mother kept the child for about a year before the child went to 
a day care center. She then had to pay for the day care expenses. The child's father 
had agreed to pay child support. However, the child's father never paid child support, 
3 
 
and he is in arrears over $29,000 (Tr. 71-77; App. Ex. P, Account summary, dated 
August 28, 2009). 
 
 Applicant had to change jobs in January 1998, but she was not working full-time 
so her pay was reduced. She was unable to work and attend school so she stopped her 
schooling at that time. She also purchased a car for transportation for her job. At that 
time, she was also interviewed and featured in the local newspaper concerning how a 
young single mother had to manage. Applicant was not making enough revenue to 
support herself and the child, so she started using credit cards (Tr. 77-80). 
 
 Applicant used her credit cards to provide for the support of her child and herself. 
She thought the child's father would pay the required child support and she would be 
able to pay off the credit card debts. Applicant continued working, in fact working two 
jobs. She was able to make some payments on the credit card debts until she was laid 
off from both jobs in April 2003. She was unemployed for over two years until October 
2005. During this time, she drew unemployment for six months and also assisted her 
parents in their business for minimal pay. She started working for her current employer, 
a defense contractor, in October 2005 (Tr. 14-17, 80-85).   
 
 In 2008, Applicant went to a local government agency for debt counseling (App. 
Ex. A, Counseling documents, undated). They recommended that she apply for a local 
government program to subsidize the purchase or building of a house. She received 
counseling from the government agency to assist her in paying her debts. They advised 
her to pay off her smallest debts first and then move to the largest debts. Her goal was 
to improve her credit score to qualify for the housing program. Just prior to the hearing, 
Applicant was notified that she was approved for the program because she had followed 
an action plan to pay off some of her credit card debts (Tr. 17-20; App. Ex. B, Housing 
documents, undated). 
 
 Applicant is currently paid $9.86 an hour. Her monthly net salary is approximately 
$1,243. Her monthly expenses are approximately $1,150. Applicant recently had an 
operation on her knee after she fell. While her health insurance paid most of her 
medical expenses, she was required to pay $500 prior to the operation and her post-
operation co-payments were $3,120. She pays $50 monthly towards this debt and has 
reduced the debt to $2,700. After these expenses, her monthly discretionary funds are 
about $50 (Tr. 25-27, 45-47, 85-92; App Ex. C, D, E, F, and G, Medical bills, various 
dates; App. Ex. L, Bill schedule, undated). 
 
 Applicant acknowledged she has not made required payments on the credit card 
delinquent accounts. She has not made payments on the credit card listed in SOR 
allegation 1.a since 2003. She believes the debt owed is only $1,961.92, as listed on 
the credit card company documents, and not the $2,295 listed in the SOR (Tr. 33-45; 
App. Ex. H, I, J, and K, Credit card statements, dated December 13, 2003, and August 
29, 2008).  
 
 Applicant's last payment on the debt listed at SOR allegation 1.b was in 
November 2003. However, Applicant maintained contact with the creditor. The debt is 
4 
 
listed on the SOR for $11,394, but Applicant believes the true debt, based on the 
account statements received from the creditor is $9,855. She has been offered 
settlement agreements for lump sum payments over the years. The latest offer was for 
a lump sum payment settlement of $6,836.81. She does not have the funds to pay the 
settlement (Tr. 45-55; App. Ex. M, Credit card statement, dated February 12, 2009). 
 
 Applicant believes based on an analysis of the credit card statements that the 
amount owed on the delinquent credit card debt listed at SOR allegation 1.c is for 
$3,952, rather than the $4,396 listed in the SOR. She also believes the amount owed on 
the credit card debt listed at SOR allegation 1.d is accurately reported on the SOR as 
$5,435. She has not made payments on these debts since 2003. In addition, Applicant 
paid in full debts for a telephone account, a credit card, and a cable bill ((Tr. 55-67, App. 
Ex. N, Credit statements, dated April 6, 2008; App. Ex. O, Credit report, dated May 27, 
2009).  
 
 Applicant presented letters from friends and co-workers attesting to her 
trustworthiness, honesty, and sense of responsibility (App. Ex. P, Letters, various 
dates). Her father wrote that Applicant showed a high level of integrity and moral value 
in managing her debts for herself and her son (App. Ex. Q, Letter, dated August 29, 
2009). Applicant presented course completion certificates and awards from her 
employer. Her performance has been excellent and she is listed as one of the 
company's most productive employees (App. Ex. R, Certificates and performance 
reviews, various dates). She has also been approved to return to technical school to 
finish her education (App. Ex. S, Letter, dated August 8, 2008). 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . " assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
5 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
There is a public trust concern for a failure or inability to live within one=s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations indicating poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligation to 
protect sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a public trust position. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent credit card debts, as established by credit reports 
6 
 
and Applicant’s statements and testimony, are a security concern raising Financial 
Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
Applicant has four credit card debts that have been delinquent for over six years 
indicating a history of not meeting financial obligations, as well as an inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy her debts. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separations) and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). The debts became delinquent in 2003, are still unpaid, and 
are thus current debt. Applicant incurred the debts because she used credit cards to 
purchase items for her and her son. She worked two jobs but still did not make sufficient 
funds to meet her and her son's needs. Her son's father was to pay child support but he 
has not done so. The credit card debts became delinquent when Applicant was laid off 
and could no longer maintain payments on the debts. The circumstances of how the 
debts were accumulated and her loss of employment were beyond her control. She had 
emergency surgery for an injury, but is making payments on those medical debts. She 
has not accumulated additional delinquent debt. In fact, she paid off a number of other 
debts. She sought financial counseling and qualified for a local government program to 
enable her to buy a house. The circumstances of the delinquent debts being beyond her 
control and her actions to manage and pay her current debts show she acted 
responsibly and reasonably. Applicant's action in paying her current debts is a strong 
indication that delinquent debt is not likely to recur. The debts do not now cast doubt on 
her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 I have considered FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control). Applicant received financial counseling when she 
discussed with a professional financial counseling service an approach to resolving her 
financial issues. She also received financial counseling from a local government 
housing authority to assist her in qualifying for house purchase. Her financial problems 
are under control.   
 
I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic method of handling debts is needed. Applicant 
must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A "meaningful track record" 
of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of 
debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not required to establish that she paid off 
each and every debt listed. The entirety of an Applicant’s financial situation and her 
actions can reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which that Applicant’s 
7 
 
plan for the reduction of her outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. 
Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts 
one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. All that is required 
is that Applicant demonstrates she has established a plan to resolve her financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.   
 
Applicant has paid her current obligations, and is making payments on her 
medical debts that she recently incurred.  She has not been able to make payments on 
the four credit card debts listed in the SOR. The debts were incurred to purchase items 
for her and her son. The boy's father was to pay child support but did not. The amount 
of the credit card debts was approximately $23,000, and the amount owed in child 
support is over $29,000. It is reasonable to conclude that Applicant would not have used 
the credit cards to purchase items if the child support payments had been made. 
Applicant's actions in working two jobs at a time to earn money to support her and her 
son, attending school to prepare herself for better employment, seeking housing support 
from a government agency, and paying her current debts is significant and credible 
information to show that she acted reasonably under the circumstances.  
 
I considered FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of action 
to resolve he issue). Applicant does not dispute that she owes the four credit card 
debts. She does dispute the amount owed for three of the debts. She presented 
sufficient information to show a reasonable basis to dispute the amount of the debts. 
The difference in the amounts, however, is not sufficiently significant to affect resolving 
the issues. 
 
Applicant acted responsibly towards her debts and finances under the 
circumstances. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations by establishing that the reasons for her debts were beyond 
her control and that she took reasonable and responsible efforts to manage her 
finances. Her finances do not indicate a public trust concern.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
8 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant's efforts to 
make a better life for her and her son, her work ethic in working two jobs at a time to 
support her and her son, and that she is highly regarded by her employer and is 
considered honest, trustworthy, and reliable by friends, associates, and co-workers. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt using credit cards to purchase items needed by her 
and her infant son. She was only 18 years old at the time and just finishing high school. 
The child's father did not pay his required child support. The child support arrears are 
more than the amount of the delinquent credit cards.  
 
 Applicant established a meaningful track record of debt payment of her current 
debts. She has or is paying all of her present debts except for the four listed in the SOR. 
She established that she acted reasonably and responsibly towards her finances 
indicating she will act reasonably and responsibly to protect sensitive information. The 
management of present finances indicates she will be concerned, responsible, and not 
careless concerning sensitive information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
