1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 08-12061
SSN: ------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility for an industrial security clearance.
The record shows Applicant engaged in wrongful work-related conduct when (1) he
used a company credit card for unauthorized purchases in September 2006, and (2) he
failed to return government-issued equipment after he left employment with a defense
contractor in about October 2005, and he still possesses the equipment. The facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s conduct create doubts about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from these incidents.
Accordingly, as explained below in detail, this case is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on March 5, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E for
personal conduct. The SOR also recommended submitting the case to an administrative
judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2009, and stated he did not wish to
have a hearing due to his financial situation (Applicant resides overseas in Germany).
The Agency submitted its written case consisting of all relevant and material information
that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file of relevant material was mailed to
Applicant and he responded in timely fashion. The case was assigned to me on June 8,
2009. Upon review of Applicant’s Answer and his reason for declining a hearing, I
contacted Applicant and Department Counsel per e-mail, dated June 25, 2009, and
advised Applicant that it was unnecessary to travel to the United States for a hearing
because it was possible to conduct the hearing via video teleconference (VTC).
Applicant then elected to proceed with a VTC hearing, and the case was converted to a
hearing case. 
The hearing took place as scheduled on July 28, 2009. The government called
no witnesses and offered Exhibits 1–4, which were admitted. Applicant’s testimony was
taken and Exhibits A–JJ were admitted, except for Exhibits R, S, X, Y, Z, and CC, which
were excluded for the reasons stated during the hearing. 
The record was left open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentary
evidence. Those matters were timely submitted, and they are marked and admitted as
follows: (1) Exhibit KK–DD Form 214, date of separation from service December 1986;
(2) Exhibit LL–DD Form 214, date of separation from service October 1989; (3) Exhibit
MM–memorandum, dated June 21, 2005, concerning contractor letter of
accreditation/identification for Applicant; (4) Exhibit NN–report of investigation
concerning Applicant (eight pages); (5) Exhibit OO–medical record, dated January 9,
2006 (an English translation and the German original); and (6) Exhibit PP–stipulation of
settlement in Applicant’s case under The Longshore and Harbor Workers’
Compensation Act (LHWCA), 18 pages. In addition, Applicant submitted a three-page
letter setting forth facts and arguments. It is marked as Exhibit QQ, but not admitted
because the record was not kept open for that purpose. The 224-page hearing
transcript (Tr.) was received August 5, 2009. 
 Appellate Exhibit II.2
 Much of this information is found in Exhibit PP. 3
 Exhibit KK.4
3
Procedural Matters
Applicant, per e-mail dated July 8, 2009, moved to dismiss the SOR allegations
for various reasons (Appellate Exhibit I). The motion was denied because an
administrative judge lacks authority to dismiss an SOR (Tr. 22–23). In a subsequent e-
mail, dated July 24, 2009, Applicant requested that his security clearance be reinstated
immediately on the grounds that he had never committed a breach of national security
as well as for additional reasons (Appellate Exhibit III). I construed the request as a
motion to dismiss the SOR and denied that motion as well (Tr. 25–26).  
A pre-hearing conference was conducted by telephone on July 9, 2009, to
discuss certain issues in advance of the hearing. The results of the pre-hearing
conference were summarized in writing and made part of the record (Appellate Exhibit
II). Neither party had additions, corrections, or objections to the summary (Tr. 22–25). 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged two incidents of work-related conduct
summarized as follows: (1) Applicant used a company credit card for unauthorized
purchases in September 2006; and (2) Applicant failed to return government-issued
equipment after he left employment with a defense contractor in about October 2005.
Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence.
Applicant is a 50-year-old telecommunications specialist. He is currently
unemployed, but a defense contractor is sponsoring him for a clearance with plans to
offer him a part-time job should he obtain a clearance.  His first two marriages ended in2
divorce, and he is currently separated from his third wife. He has children from the
marriages as well. 
1. Applicant’s previous employment history.
Because this case involves work-related conduct, Applicant’s employment history
is set forth in detail.  After graduating from high school in 1977, Applicant worked as a3
laborer in a series of jobs until he enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1979. He completed basic
training, and then completed advanced training in telecommunications. He was
assigned to Germany in 1980, and he worked in the field of telecommunications until his
honorable discharge in December 1986, when he was a sergeant (pay grade E-5).4
Most, but not all, of that period was served in Germany, and he was separated in
Germany. 
 Exhibit LL. 5
4
About three months later in March 1987, Applicant reenlisted in the Army. Again,
he worked in telecommunications, but his service was cut short when he was
discharged after two years and six months due to alcohol abuse–rehabilitation failure.5
Despite the reason for separation, his character of service was deemed honorable, and
he was discharged as a private first class (pay grade E-3).
 
In 1990, Applicant began work for a company as a telecommunications network
technician working on various military installations in Germany. He remained in this job
until about 1993. There was then no work available for Applicant in Germany in his field,
so Applicant accepted a job as a manager at a fast-food restaurant in the U.S. In about
1994, he moved to another state in the U.S. and began working as a manager of a gas
station. He remained in this job for about a year until 1995, when he returned to
Germany.
In about March 1996, Applicant went back to work for a previous employer as a
telecommunications network technician. He worked in this position in Germany for
about six months. In the summer of 1996, Applicant began work with another company
doing satellite installation. He worked throughout Europe for about six months.
 In about February 1997, Applicant returned to a previous employer in the same
position as a telecommunications network technician. He continued in this job through
about September 1998. He then started work for another company as a
telecommunications consultant. He worked in this position until about March 2001,
when he was laid off due to a decline in the telecommunications field.
Applicant was unemployed until about March 2002, when he accepted a job as a
consultant working throughout Europe setting up telecommunications conferences. He
left this job about a year later in March 2003. He returned to this employer about one
month later and was supposed to work in Iraq, but that mission or job was cancelled
about two months later. 
In about August 2003, Applicant again started work for a previous employer. He
worked as a telecommunications technician in an East African country for about three
months. He was then unemployed from the end of 2003 until September 2004. He then
accepted a job working on satellite systems in Iraq, and he worked in this job until about
February 2005. He began another job about two months later. This job required him to
install satellite and wireless systems in Iraq for the U.S. military. He left this job about
two months later in June 2005, when he accepted a job with a defense contractor  in
Iraq (Company A). The circumstances of his employment with Company A and
Company B, another defense contractor, are the subject of the SOR allegations and are
discussed below.
 Exhibit MM.6
 Exhibit PP at 6.7
 Exhibit GG. 8
 Tr. 195–198. 9
 Tr. 137, 195–198. 10
 Exhibit 4 (Attachment G). 11
 Exhibit 4 (Attachment G, e-mail dated July 31, 2006). 12
5
2. Applicant’s employment with Company A and the government-issued
equipment.  
In June 2005, Applicant began employment with Company A as a senior field
service technician (VTC) in Iraq.  In about October 2005, Applicant had an argument6
with another employee at the work site and he passed out.  He was hospitalized in Iraq7
and eventually moved to a U.S. military medical facility in Germany. He stayed there
until his blood pressure was brought under control. In about March 2006, Applicant was
medically cleared to return to work, but did not return to his job with Company A. 
Previously, Applicant was issued military equipment (such as TA-50 gear,
sleeping bag, sleeping bag line, wet weather gear, poncho line, rubber boots, TA-50
bag, etc.) from a U.S. Army installation.  He believes he obtained the equipment in8
about 2004, when he was working for another employer.  Per e-mail, he contacted9
Company A in about April or May 2005 to arrange a round-trip flight to return the
equipment (it had been shipped to him from Iraq). A human resources (HR) specialist
replied and advised that the equipment was to be returned to the U.S. Army installation,
not a Marine Corps base as indicated by Applicant. The HR specialist offered to provide
a one-way economy-class airline ticket to the installation and a one-way economy-class
airline ticket to Applicant’s home of record in the U.S. Applicant deemed that
unacceptable because he wanted a round-trip airline ticket to and from Germany, his
place of residence. As a result, the equipment at issue was not returned, and Applicant
still has the equipment in Germany.   10
In addition, Applicant had another dispute with Company A when items of
personal property he left behind in Iraq (due to the medical evacuation) were not
returned to him in Germany.  The dispute became so heated that a senior counsel for11
Company A, who replied to Applicant on behalf of the HR specialist, characterized an e-
mail from Applicant to the HR specialist as “quite simply outrageous,” and noted that
Applicant’s e-mail contained “obscene language but also veiled threats.”  Also,12
Applicant took legal action against Company A, when he claimed he was owed
compensation benefits and medical benefits due to a work-related injury under the
 Exhibit PP. 13
 Tr. 141. 14
 Exhibit 4 (Attachment C). 15
 Exhibit OO.16
 Exhibit 4 (Attachment A).17
 Exhibit G. 18
 Exhibit H. 19
6
jurisdiction of the Defense Base Act extension of the LHWCA. It appears the claim was
settled  for a $40,000 lump-sum payment to Applicant in about August 2008.13
3. Applicant’s employment with Company B and his misuse of the credit card.
In about June 2006, Applicant began employment with Company B under a one-
year contract to work in Iraq.  Company B issued to Applicant an American Express14
credit card for company-related business expenses. Applicant acknowledged in writing
the terms associated with using the credit card, which included termination of
employment or loss of a U.S. Government security clearance if the card was misused.  15
Applicant stopped working for Company B in September 2006, when his wife,
who was then pregnant (and she had previously suffered a miscarriage in 2005),  was16
sick and demanded Applicant return home to Germany. Applicant departed Iraq on
about September 8 and was to return to a Marine Corps base in the U.S. to out-process
and return any issued equipment. Company B authorized him to travel to Germany
during the trip to visit his spouse, but the detour was at his own expense.  Applicant17
traveled by air from Iraq to London, when he then flew to Frankfurt, rented a car, and
drove to his residence in Germany. He dropped off his gear and then returned the rental
car to the Frankfurt airport the same day. He charged the airline ticket to Frankfurt and
the rental car on the company-issued credit card. He stayed briefly in Germany and
then traveled to the U.S. where he returned equipment, but it appears did not complete
other out-processing items. He then returned to Germany. Company B had no
communication from Applicant from September 8 until Applicant reestablished contact
on about September 26, 2006.
When he decided to stop working for Company B in September 2006, Applicant
sent a letter of resignation via e-mail to the company president.  He explained he was18
resigning due to his wife’s condition and her request that he return to Germany. The
company president replied, per e-mail, the same day. He indicated he was sorry to lose
Applicant as an employee and said that “I understand that you need to do what you
need to do.”  Applicant, in his hearing testimony, pointed to that language as implicit19
authorization for him to use the company-issued credit card to pay for the Germany-
related travel expenses because the president knew Applicant did not have a personal
 Tr. 147–151. 20
 Exhibit 4. 21
 Exhibit 3. 22
 Exhibit 3. 23
 Exhibit 4 (Attachment A). 24
 Tr. 194. 25
 Most of this information is based on Exhibit PP. 26
7
credit card.  I find that the particular phrase in the president’s e-mail was an expression20
of empathy or understanding of Applicant’s situation; it was not any type of authorization
to use the company-issued credit card for personal expenses.  
In subsequent and multiple e-mails, the company president informed Applicant
that certain charges to the credit card were not authorized and raised other concerns as
well.  Company B determined Applicant owed the sum of $385.06, and informed21
Applicant on about September 27, 2006.  The next day, Applicant wrote a check for22
that amount and sent it to Company B, which cashed it.  Subsequently, in October23
2006, Company B filed an adverse incident report concerning Applicant with an agency
of the Defense Department.  The report addressed several subjects that are not the24
basis for the SOR. In hindsight, Applicant acknowledges that he did not handle the
situation with Company B well, and that he should have had better communication with
the company president.  25
4. Applicant’s subsequent employment and current life situation.26
Returning to Germany in October 2006, Applicant did satellite work for a German
company for a couple of months. He has been essentially unemployed since about
December 2006, which is about when he and his wife separated. Since then, Applicant
has been homeless at times, living on the streets and in a homeless shelter. He, like his
wife, received welfare money from the German government. He claimed to have
attempted suicide in about April 2007, when he overdosed on heart medicine pills. He
claimed that he tried to kill himself because of the pressure of not working and other
issues. He claimed that he then spent three weeks in a German psychiatric clinic. He is
now living in Germany, separated from his wife, where he has the offer of part-time
employment with a U.S. defense contractor.  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to27
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.28
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 29
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 30
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).31
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.32
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.33
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.34
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 35
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).36
8
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As27
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,28
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An29
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  30
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting31
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An32
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate33
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme34
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.35
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.36
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.37
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶¶ 15, 16, 17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating38
conditions).  
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 15.39
9
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the37
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and38
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, security concerns may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  39
Both the disqualifying and mitigating conditions should be analyzed in light of the
record as a whole. And unique to this case is the nature of the difficult work conditions
in Iraq, the potential danger of working in Iraq, and the associated stress. Accordingly, I
have considered these matters in reaching my decision.  
The record shows Applicant engaged in wrongful work-related conduct that calls
into question his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. The record establishes that
Applicant: (1) used a company credit card for unauthorized purchases in September
2006; and (2) failed to return government-issued equipment after he left employment
with a defense contractor in about October 2005, and he still possesses the equipment.
These two matters are substantially narrower issues than the several issues raised in
the adverse information report submitted by Company B, and my decision is limited to
the SOR. 
The two incidents of wrongful work-related conduct raise security concerns under
the following disqualifying conditions: 
10
¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and 
¶ 16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of
sensitive corporate or other government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time
or resources.
Taken together, the two incidents show inability or unwillingness (or both) to abide by
workplace rules and norms. This raises questions or doubts about Applicant’s ability to
properly handle and safeguard classified information. 
I considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline E and conclude none
apply in Applicant’s favor. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant’s use of the company-
issued credit card was improper, and I am persuaded that Applicant knew that when he
used it. To his credit, he promptly paid Company B the money they demanded. But his
attempt to justify his misuse by pointing to the company president’s e-mail (“you need to
do what you need to do”) is misplaced. It is nothing more than a transparent
rationalization used in an attempt to conceal the truth. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, the
government-issued equipment is not of great monetary value, but Applicant continues to
possess the equipment. His long-term retention of the equipment likely amounts to
wrongful appropriation or larceny of the equipment. Given his disingenuous explanation
for using the credit card and his ongoing possession of the government-issued
equipment, Applicant does not receive the benefit of any mitigating conditions.
Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. In reaching this conclusion, I
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).40
11
gave due consideration to the nine-factor whole-person concept,  and none of those40
factors is sufficient to change the outcome of the case. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant.
 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
