                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-00110 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline H (Drug Involvement) security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On May 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised. The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
 
1  Item 3. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 12, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 15, 2009, was provided to him by letter 
dated July 16, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on July 21, 2009. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit any additional information within the time period of 
30 days after receipt of the copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
October 9, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. He also provided an explanation for 
his past drug use to include that he had not used drugs in over a year, that he no longer 
associates with the persons using drugs, that he has been living in a “drug free” area for 
over a year, and that he would submit to drug testing. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old software developer.2 He attended college from August 
1997 to December 2003, and estimates that he was awarded a Bachelor of Science 
Degree in Computer Science in June 2004. 
 
Applicant has never married, and disclosed no dependents. He did not serve in 
the military. He disclosed no police record; and no alcohol-related problems, counseling 
or treatment. He has worked for the same employer, a defense contractor, since June 
2008. Applicant seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her employment. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The facts are not in dispute. Applicant admittedly used marijuana over 100 times 
from June 1997 through at least April 2008.3 Applicant’s marijuana use began during his 
senior year in high school, and continued throughout his college years, and ended 
approximately one year ago when he was 29 years old.4 From about 2004 through April 
2008, Applicant used marijuana approximately weekly.5 Applicant described his drug 
 
 2 Item 4 (August 2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
3 Item 3; Item 4 at 32; Item 6 at 32; and Item 7 at 4. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Item 6 at 3-4 and Item 7 at 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
use as social use and states that he felt relaxed and at ease around people after using 
marijuana.6 Applicant also tested positive for marijuana on a pre-employment drug 
screening in May 2008,7 resulting in loss of employment with a Department of Defense 
contractor.8 Finally, Applicant admitted that he purchased marijuana as well.9 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
 
6 Item 6 at 3-4 and Item 7 at 4. 
 
7 Item 3 and Item 5. 
 
8 Item 6 at 4 and Item 7 at 4. 
 
9 Item 7 at 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).  
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern relations to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
AG ¶ 25 provides three Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) any drug abuse;”  
“(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;” and “(c) illegal drug possession including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.” Applicant’s consistent and habitual use of marijuana over 11 years, 
his purchase of marijuana, and his failing a drug test fulfill disqualifying conditions under 
Guideline H. The government established these three disqualifying conditions requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find two Drug 
Involvement Mitigating Conditions potentially applicable: AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to 
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates 
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.”  
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”10 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the 
recency analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply as the behavior did not happen so long ago. Applicant 
admittedly used marijuana until approximately one year ago. Considering his 11 years 
of use, this short passage of time cannot qualify as “so long ago.” In addition, his use 
was frequent under AG ¶ 26(a) as he admits to over 100 uses and use on a weekly 
basis from 2004 through 2008. The circumstances of his use also do not indicate that 
future use is unlikely under AG ¶ 26(a) because as noted supra, Applicant used 
marijuana for years well into adulthood. Such continued marijuana use demonstrates a 
disregard for law and the seriousness of the conduct involved. These circumstances 
undercut any claim that his use does not cast doubt on his reliability and judgment 
under AG ¶ 26(a). 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. This mitigating condition requires a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse drugs in the future. While Applicant states that he will not use illegal 
drugs, he has demonstrated only a short period of abstinence. Applicant’s decision to 
stop using drugs did not occur under circumstances involving a life changing event. 
Rather, he stopped using marijuana around the time he applied for a job in the defense 
industry where he is required to have a security clearance and where he was fired from 
a defense contractor for testing positive for marijuana. The evidence does not support 
application of the remaining mitigating conditions contained in ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d). 
Applicant’s 11-year history of consistent drug involvement and lack of favorable 
evidence preclude a finding that he has established a track record of abstinence and a 
commitment to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Based on the available 
evidence, his drug involvement is relatively recent and not isolated. He has not carried 
his burden of mitigating the Drug Involvement concerns identified. His past conduct 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s record of employment working for a government contractor weighs in 
his favor. Aside from his admitted drug involvement, he appears to be a law-abiding 
citizen. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation.   
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a significant history of drug involvement that was ongoing for 11 years. Applicant 
submitted no documentation from a qualified medical professional demonstrating a 
current or future favorable prognosis. For these reasons and reasons discussed supra, 
further time is needed and additional evidence is necessary before Applicant would be 
eligible for a security clearance. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to Drug Involvement.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.c.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
