                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01753 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On June16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 23, 2009, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on July 14, 2009. The FORM was mailed 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
to Applicant on July 15, 2009, and it was received on July 20, 2009. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant provided additional information on July 30, 2009. Department 
Counsel had no objections to the additional information. The case was assigned to me 
on September 16, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 1.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and began employment with a federal contractor in 
September 2008. She stated in her response to the FORM that she was currently 
unemployed due to certain testing being done on a project by her employer. She was 
receiving unemployment benefits and was looking for new employment with the same 
contractor or a different government contractor. She married in 1993 and divorced in 
1997. She has a daughter from her first marriage. She remarried in 2002 and has a son.  
 
 Applicant was laid off from her job in January 2007, and remained unemployed 
until February 2008. She was pregnant at the time and her son was born in March 2007.  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant and her husband had approximately $31,000 in 
delinquent debt discharged in bankruptcy under Chapter 7. The debts included in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b through 1.p were discharged in bankruptcy.1 Applicant explained that she and 
her husband attempted to address their debts through a debt consolidation program in 
October 2006. In her response, she stated they were making monthly payments, but the 
debt consolidation company was charging more than the original creditors were 
charging.2 She stated the consolidation company was not applying their payments 
toward the debts. She then lost her job, and because she was pregnant, she had 
difficulty finding employment. She received unemployment compensation for six months 
until it ran out in August 2007. She worked part-time at a store beginning in February 
2008 until September 2008, when she was hired by her current employer.  
 
 Applicant stated in her security clearance application (SCA) dated November 10, 
2008, that she owed approximately $5,100 for a student loan. She stated she had an 
agreement with the creditor to pay $68 a month that was to be paid by auto-draft from 
her account. In her response to the FORM dated July 26, 2009, she stated she set up 
an agreement with the student loan collection company to pay $50 a month beginning 
on July 1, 2009, and make a second payment on July 2, 2009; thereafter payments 
would be $50 a month. After nine consecutive payments the loan will be taken out of 
1 Response to FORM. 
 
2 Applicant did not provide any supporting documents to verify her debt consolidation program. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
default status and considered rehabilitated. It appears Applicant did not follow through 
on her promise to begin paying her student loan debt in November 2008.3  
 
 Applicant did not explain why she incurred such a large amount of consumer 
debts. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o is for $11,747. No information was provided 
regarding this debt.  
 
 Applicant provided a printout summary of certain monthly expenditures and 
deposits. It is unclear if this list includes all expenses. It is noted she has a car, but 
insurance and gas for the car are not included. She does not include clothing or other 
household expenses, including those incurred by her husband. It is also unclear if she 
has medical insurance or other out-of-pocket medical expenses, or any expenses 
associated with her children, other than day care.   
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as required for bankruptcy. She did not 
provide information about whether she has received additional financial counseling. She 
and her husband currently do not have any credit cards.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
3 Applicant’s student loan debt was not alleged in the SOR and will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes. It will be considered when analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had $31,000 in delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in May 
2009. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considering the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant was having financial difficulties before October 2006, when she set up 
a plan to consolidate her debts for repayment. She stated she made payments, and she 
believed they were not being applied properly. She also stated she was paying more to 
the consolidator than she had been paying to her creditors. She did not provide any 
supporting evidence of a debt consolidation plan or the terms of the plan. It is clear she 
was having financial problems before she was laid off from work in January 2007. Her 
unemployment status exacerbated her already fragile financial situation. She was 
pregnant at the time and was unemployed for a period of time. I find that because 
Applicant’s debts have been discharged in bankruptcy she no longer owes them. 
Bankruptcy is a legitimate and legal means for resolving debts. However, when 
addressing security concerns, it is imperative to look beyond the bankruptcy discharge 
and address the issues and reasons why Applicant accumulated debts and why she did 
not pay them. I do not have sufficient evidence to analyze the reasons why Applicant 
incurred so much consumer debt and why she could not pay it when she was employed. 
Without amplifying information, it is difficult to determine if she was acting responsibly 
toward her debts before her loss of employment.  
 
 Applicant provided a computer summary of her income and monthly payments. I 
am unable to determine if all of her expenses are included in this plan. It is unclear how 
long she has been using this plan. Applicant appears to be trying to get back on track 
financially and live within her means. I am concerned that she promised to make 
payments toward her student loans when she filled out her SCA in November 2008, and 
stated an automatic withdrawal would be made. She did not provide proof that she 
made any of those promised payments. Instead, she provided an agreement from July 
2009 that shows that she will make monthly payments of $50 toward her student loans. 
 
6 
 
 
It appears she did not make the payments as promised in November 2008. I have 
considered this information regarding Applicant’s reliability and good-faith effort to repay 
her creditors. Applicant may be on the road to financial recovery, but too little 
information was provided and it is too soon to make that determination.  
 
 I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts have only 
recently been discharged in bankruptcy and she has not had a sufficient period of time 
to show she is being financially responsible. In addition, Applicant failed to explain how 
she incurred such a large amount of consumer debt, so I am unable to conclude the 
circumstances are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition (b) partially applies 
because Applicant’s unemployment and difficulty in finding a job while pregnant and 
after she had her baby were conditions beyond her control. The question remains 
regarding when she first started experiencing financial problems. It appears that she 
was already having difficulty paying her bills before she was laid off. Without specific 
information, I am unable to conclude she acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant has resolved her delinquent debts through bankruptcy. She received the 
financial counseling that is mandatory for bankruptcy filers. I do give Applicant credit for 
establishing a summary of her income and expenses. I find mitigating conditions (c) and 
(d) apply. I find mitigating condition (d) applies. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was experiencing financial 
problems in October 2006, before losing her job. When she lost her job and was 
unemployed for a period of time it exacerbated her financial problems. She incurred 
more than $31,000 in consumer debt. She did not provide details regarding the specifics 
of her debts. She provided information regarding how she is keeping track of her 
 
7 
 
 
finances, but it is unclear if it is a complete budget. It has only been five months since 
Applicant had her debts discharged in bankruptcy. It is too soon to make a 
determination that Applicant has changed her financial situation, is living within her 
means, and is consistently paying her debts on time. Applicant has the burden of 
persuasion to show she has mitigated the government’s security concerns. She has not 
met that burden. Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b-1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
