                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00660 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 21, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 6, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 23, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. A demonstrative exhibit was offered by 
the government and was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open until October 7, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, 
which he did. They were marked as AE F through I. The government had no objections 
and the documents were admitted and the record closed.1 DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and works as computer technician for a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1997, and college in 2003, earning a 
bachelor’s degree. From May 2006 to May 2007, he attended a computer training 
course and received a certificate of completion. While attending college full-time and 
computer training, Applicant worked between 20 to 40 hours a week at various jobs to 
support himself. He was unemployed for a period of six months after leaving a job, until 
he started his current job in June 2008.2  
 
 Applicant was working in approximately 2004 or 2005, but was underemployed. 
He obtained a line of credit from a bank for $15,000 to help him pay his expenses. He 
used this money over three to four years and made regular payments of approximately 
$400 to $500 on debt. In 2007, he borrowed another $5,000 because he wanted to pay 
off his car loan, so he could trade the car in and buy another one. He thought he could 
afford the payments. He paid off his car loan and bought a 2002 used car for $8,000. 
Shortly after this transaction, he lost his job. He had difficulty finding a job and received 
unemployment benefits. He stopped making payments on the two lines of credit. In 
November 2007, he contacted a debt consolidation company and set up a repayment 
plan for his two debts. It required him to make monthly payments of $459. He began 
those payments in November 2007, and has not missed a payment to date.3 The 
company accumulates the payments and at a certain point determines that  there is 
enough money in Applicant’s account to contact his creditor and negotiate a settlement 
to pay the debt with a lump sum settlement payment. Applicant accumulated enough 
money to settle the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. for $2,229 in July 2009.4 
 
1 HE II. 
 
2 Tr. 34-40. 
 
3 AE B, C, G, H, I. 
 
4 Tr. 22-34, 41. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant continues to make monthly payments to the debt consolidator and 
anticipates he will have accumulated enough money to settle the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a by 
the summer of 2010.5  
 
 Applicant took out student loans while attending college. He has consistently 
made his monthly payments and has not been delinquent in repaying them, even when 
unemployed. He has a car loan and has not missed any payments. He has no other 
delinquent debts. He has not had financial counseling because he could not afford to 
pay a required fee. He is current on his state and federal income taxes.6  
 
 Applicant’s coworker testified on his behalf and considers him a polite and good 
person, who works hard. She has never had any problem with his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment. She is aware that he is paying his delinquent debts.7 
 
 Applicant’s roommate also testified on his behalf. He is a fraud investigator for 
the insurance industry and has served as a fraud investigator for the state, and also as 
a police officer. He owns the house where he and Applicant live. Applicant always pays 
his rent on time and has never been late. He is aware that Applicant takes every 
advantage he can to work overtime and believes he lives within his means, and does 
not buy frivolous things. He believes Applicant is committed to resolving his delinquent 
debts. He knows Applicant made some poor financial decisions in the past, but he is 
taking responsibility and has a solid plan for resolving his debts.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
5 Tr. 32-33. 
 
6 Tr. 43-47, 53-56. 
 
7 Tr. 63-71. 
 
8 Tr. 72-78; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
5 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated two debts that he was unable to pay. They became 
delinquent in 2007. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 When Applicant was underemployed and unemployed, he knew he was having 
trouble making payments on the two debts so he sought assistance with a debt 
consolidation company. He did not neglect his debts, but set up a plan to settle them. 
He acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has been consistently making 
payments into the plan and has settled one of his delinquent debts. He continues to 
make regular payments into the plan and anticipates settling the remaining debt once 
he has accumulated enough money. Applicant had a period of underemployment and 
unemployment that affected his ability to pay his bills. He is current on all other 
obligations, including his student loans. Applicant acted responsibly and there are clear 
indications that he will resolve the remaining debt with his repayment plan. He works 
overtime when he can and does not spend his money frivolously. I find all of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced financial 
problems when he was underemployed and unemployed. Two of his debt obligations 
became delinquent. He contacted a debt consolidation company and set up a plan to 
resolve the debts. He has settled one debt and is saving through his plan to resolve the 
other debt. Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. His co-worker and 
roommate are supportive of his request for a security clearance. They are aware of his 
financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
