                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-02959 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed a bankruptcy in 2006 and six debts 
totaling $66,159. She denied one debt for $276 and admitted responsibility for the other 
five debts. None of the five SOR debts were paid or otherwise resolved. She failed to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 6). 
On June 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 29, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 11, 2009, was provided to 
her, and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did respond to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on October 8, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, she admitted all of the SOR allegations, 
except SOR ¶ 1.f (Item 4). She also provided an explanation for her financial problems 
and promised to resolve her delinquent debts (Item 4). After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 She has been a 
project manager since November 2008. She worked as a lighting specialist from March 
to October 2008, and she was unemployed from July 2007 to March 2008. She was 
self-employed at a take-out food service establishment from October 2005 to July 
2007.4  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1985, and did not attend college. 
She married in 1988 and divorced in 1990. She married in 1991 and is currently 
married. Her three children were born in 1992, 1994, and 1996. She has never served 
in the U.S. military. She has never been fired from a job or left employment under 
adverse circumstances. Her file does not contain any adverse information relating to 
police involvement. For example, she has never been charged with a felony, any 
firearms or explosives offense(s), and does not have any currently pending charges. 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 12, 2009; 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated August 18, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after her receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information 
is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
October 24, 2007, security clearance application (Item 6). 
 
4 Applicant and her partner started a food service business, which was terminated in July 2007 
(Item 5). Applicant and her partner filed suit against each other for money damages in 2007 (Item 5). The 
case went to mediation in February 2008; however, the record does not indicate the result of the 
mediation or litigation (Item 5).   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
She has never been charged with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. She has not 
been arrested for or charged with any other misdemeanor-level offenses. There is no 
evidence that she has abused alcohol or drugs.  
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) in ¶ 1.a listed a bankruptcy discharge of 
her debts in September 2006. The SOR also listed six debts totaling $66,159 as follows: 
¶ 1.b (2007 default judgment—$4,175); ¶ 1.c (IRS tax lien—$60,605); ¶ 1.d (collection 
account—$162); ¶ 1.e (collection account—$279); ¶ 1.f (delinquent account—$276); 
and ¶ 1.g (2007 default judgment—$662) (Item 1). Her SOR response admitted all 
debts except she denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f (Item 4). 
 
On July 29, 2009, Applicant provided a statement describing her financial 
problems and plans to resolve her delinquent debts.5 She did not subsequently provide 
any information about her attempts to resolve her financial problems.  
 
In 2005, Applicant and her husband had a business. Their business had difficulty 
obtaining payments for services and supplies from creditors. She and her husband also 
had problems with the business due to inexperience (Item 5). In October 2005, 
Applicant and her husband filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. She received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy process. In 
September 2006, the bankruptcy court discharged her unsecured debts (Item 7). Her 
bankruptcy schedules listed $493,082 in unsecured nonpriority claims, $46,000 in 
unsecured priority claims, and $411,500 in secured claims (Item 7). Applicant used her 
residence as collateral for a line of credit for their company and lost her house when 
their business failed.  
 
Applicant disclosed her financial problems on her security clearance application 
(Item 6), her response to DOHA interrogatories (Item 5), and her SOR response (Item 
4). Her largest unresolved debt is an IRS tax lien for $60,605, which related to unpaid 
federal payroll taxes incurred from the business Applicant and her husband owned 
(Items 4, 9). She has an accountant and attorney working on the IRS tax lien as well as 
two other city tax liens. She promised to resolve her debts. She did not provided any 
documents showing her communications with her creditors, accountant, or attorney 
concerning her efforts to dispute, pay, or otherwise resolve her delinquent SOR debts.6    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
5Unless stated otherwise, the facts in the remainder of this section are from Applicant’s response 
to the SOR (Item 4). 
 
6The FORM at pages 6-7 emphasizes the lack of documentation showing efforts to resolve the 
SOR debts.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, in her 
response to DOHA interrogatories, and in her SOR response. Applicant’s SOR listed a 
bankruptcy in 2006 and six debts totaling $66,159. Her financial difficulties extended 
over several years and continue today. The government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because she did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her delinquent 
debts. Her delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because she did not establish that her financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether she is fully committed to resolving her delinquent SOR 
debts and is making adequate steps to do so. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because she 
did not provide any documentation disputing any of the SOR debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by 
creditors’ failures to pay Applicant and her husband for their business’ supplies and 
services, Applicant’s unemployment, and their inexperience running a business. 
However, she has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances with respect to her delinquent SOR debts.7  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant received financial counseling as part of her 
bankruptcy process, and she probably has otherwise learned about financial issues. 
Applicant has not paid, started payment plans, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of 
the SOR debts. She did not provide specific descriptions of her timeline for setting up 
payment arrangements of any SOR debts. These are some initial, positive “indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” She has admitted her 
responsibility for the debts and promised to eventually resolve them. She established 
some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because she showed some good faith8 in the 
 
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
resolution of her SOR debts by admitting responsibility for all of her SOR debts except 
for one small debt and promising to resolve them.  
 
Applicant consistently denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f for $276 
(Item 4). I conclude this debt is not established as her responsibility, and find “For 
Applicant” in the Formal Findings on page 8, infra.   
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve her delinquent debts. In September 2006, her unsecured debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. She said she is working with an 
attorney and accountant to resolve her $60,605 IRS lien. She did not show any attempts 
to resolve her smaller SOR debts. Her steps are simply inadequate to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for granting or reinstating Applicant’s clearance is 
insufficient to support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending 
to support approval of her clearance. Applicant deserves substantial credit for 
 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
volunteering to support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense 
contractor. There is no evidence that she has a criminal record or has ever violated 
security. There is every indication that she is loyal to the United States, the Department 
of Defense, her employer, and that she is an honorable person. She does not abuse 
alcohol or illegal drugs. She has never been fired from a job or left employment under 
adverse circumstances. Her file does not contain any adverse information relating to 
police involvement. She is evidently not sophisticated in the area of finance. She made 
mistakes, and her debts became delinquent. Expenses from her failed business 
contributed to her financial woes. She learned some financial information as part of her 
financial counseling received during her bankruptcy proceeding. These factors show 
some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against granting or reinstating Applicant’s clearance 
are more substantial. Failure to pay or resolve her just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. She began to have 
financial difficulties several years ago, when multiple debts became delinquent. In June 
2009, she responded to DOHA interrogatories, and on July 29, 2009, she responded to 
the SOR. She had ample opportunity to contact more of her SOR creditors and to make 
greater progress in the resolution of her SOR debts. She did not pay, start payments, 
dispute, or otherwise resolve any SOR debts. She made insufficient progress to resolve 
her delinquent debts, even though she had steady employment and ample opportunity 
to contact her creditors and provide documentation. She was on clear notice from her 
receipt of DOHA interrogatories and even more so after she received the SOR that she 
needed to show substantial progress in the resolution of her delinquent debts; however, 
she did not provide documentation showing her efforts to accomplish this security 
responsibility.    
   
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the 
government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
