1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-01425
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 29, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On April 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E
for Applicant (Item 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, on May 27, 2009 (Item 3).
He requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
2
On June 11, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department's written
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant, and he was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on August 5, 2009. Applicant
did not submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative
Judge on September 9, 2009.
In the FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits (Items 1-
7). No documents were offered by Applicant. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR (Item 3) Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a., and 1.c. through
1.f., and he denied 1.b., 1.g., and 1.h., under Guideline F. He also admitted 2.a., under
Guideline E. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including the
FORM, Applicant's RSOR and the other admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 34 years old. He works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a
Department of Defense security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F- Financial Considerations)
The SOR lists eight allegations (1.a. through 1.h.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as
they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $14,653. As stated
above, Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), and no evidence has been
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not
been paid. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $9,209. Applicant
denied this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), stating that this debt was for a vehicle belonging
to his ex-wife in his divorce decree. In his response to interrogatories (Item 7), Applicant
stated that this debt is the same as 1.a., above. In reviewing the credit reports submitted
by the Government (Items 5 and 6), I find there are different collection account numbers
and significantly different amounts owed for these two debts, and the report indicated
that one debt was for an auto loan, while the other debt did not identify the type of loan.
Therefore, I cannot conclude that this debt is the same as 1.a., above. I find that no
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been paid. 
3
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,548. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $379. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,868. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,830. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $13,368. Applicant
denied this debt in his RSOR (Item 3). In his response to interrogatories (Item 7),
Applicant stated that this debt is the same as 1.a., above. In reviewing the credit reports
submitted by the Government (Items 5 and 6), I find these two debts are both identified
as auto loans and the amounts owed for these two debts are reasonably close, so I
conclude that this debt is the same as 1.a., above and it is only owed once. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $538. Applicant
denied this debt in his RSOR (Item 3). In his response to interrogatories (Item 7),
Applicant stated that he did “not know what this debt is.”  In reviewing the credit report
(Item 5), there is a notation beside this debt that states “consumer says acct not his.” I
find that Applicant has made a good faith effort to dispute this debt.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
2.a. Applicant executed a signed SCA on July 19, 2009 (Item 4). Question 28.a.
asks, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”
Applicant answered “No” to this question, and he listed no debts. The Government
alleges that Applicant should have included the debts listed in the SOR as 1.a.
through1.d., and 1.f. through 1.h., above. There is no dispute that these debts were all
long overdue and were still owing at the time Applicant completed the SCA, and they
should have been included in the responses to 28.a. 
 Also, while it was not alleged on the SOR, Question 28.b. of the SCA asks, “Are
you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to this
question, and he listed no debts. Applicant also should have included the same debts
as those alleged on 2.a., above. 
Applicant offered no explanation for his failure to list any of the debts that he had
owed for a significant period of time. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
Regarding the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline F, I conclude both
DC 19. (a) and DC 19. (c) apply, because of Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to
satisfy his debts, and his long history of not meeting financial obligations.
While Applicant submitted evidence of his divorce from his ex-wife on March 3,
2006, no evidence was introduced to establish that this was the cause of Applicant’s
financial difficulties. Additionally, Item 7 contained Applicant’s Personal Financial
Statement, dated March 16, 2009, which showed that Applicant has a net remainder of
$1,149.91 a month. There was no explanation given by Applicant as to why he has not
used any of this remainder to resolve his overdue debts. I cannot find that any Mitigating
Condition (MC) applies as no evidence has been introduced to establish that Applicant
has resolved any of his overdue debts.  I, therefore, hold Guideline F against Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
       With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant provided
incorrect material information to the Government on the SCA that he executed on July
19, 2007. Applicant identified no debts that were over 180 days overdue in the last
seven years prior to his completing the SCA, nor any current debts that were over 90
days overdue, when clearly he should have identified the debts listed on the SOR.
Applicant gave no explanation for his failure to put the Government on notice that he
had financial difficulties.
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to the Government, it is extremely difficult to
conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty necessary for an
individual given a clearance. In this case, based on Applicant’s overall history, my
inability to see the Applicant and judge his veracity in person, and the lack of any
witness to provide testimony regarding Applicant’s character, I can find no reasonable
explanation for Applicant’s failure to provide this very significant information to the
Government on the SCA, and I must conclude that Applicant knowingly and willingly
failed to furnish honest information to the Government. 
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline E, I conclude that 
DC16. (a) applies because Applicant deliberately provided false and misleading
information to the Government in a SCA.   No Mitigating Condition applies under this
Guideline.  As a result of the misinformation that Applicant  provided to the Government,
his conduct exhibits questionable judgement, unreliability, and a lack of candor. I
resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
6
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome the
Government's evidence opposing his request for a security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the allegations expressed in
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's SOR. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation;
(3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s history of financial
difficulties, his failure to resolve the overdue debts, and his willful omissions made to the
Government, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.g.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
