1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 09-02355
SSN: -------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The action
is based on foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s ties or connections
to China. The record contains substantial evidence of Applicant’s strong family ties to
China. His family ties, when viewed in light of the identity of the foreign country involved,
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. The record contains insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
security concerns. Accordingly, as explained in detail below, this case is decided
against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 FORM at 2–11. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on June 30, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B for
foreign influence. The SOR also recommended submitting the case to an administrative
judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security-clearance eligibility.  
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2009, when he submitted a three-page
memorandum in which he requested a decision without a hearing. Accordingly, the case
will be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
On July 31, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by him on August 14,
2009. He then had 30 days to submit a documentary response setting forth objections,
rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. He did not respond within the 30-day
period. The case was assigned to me September 23, 2009. 
Procedural Matters
Administrative or official notice was taken of certain facts concerning the
People’s Republic of China (China) as set forth in Department Counsel’s written
request.  In summary, the most pertinent of those facts are the following: (1) China is2
ruled by an authoritarian government dominated and controlled by the Chinese
Communist Party; (2) China is actively engaged in intelligence gathering (industrial and
military) that targets U.S. information and technology; and (3) China has a poor record
of human rights (for example, the brutal suppression of demonstrators at Tiananmen
and the ongoing serious human rights abuses in Tibet). 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
 Answer to SOR.3
 Answer to SOR. 4
 Exhibit 5 and the Answer to the SOR are the sources for most of this information. 5
3
Applicant is a 52-year-old senior software engineer who is employed by a federal
contractor. He is married and has two children who are both native-born citizens of the
U.S. His wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen, and she is employed as a business
analyst for a pharmaceutical company. This is the first time Applicant has applied for a
security clearance, completing an application in October 2008.  
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in China. Before coming to the U.S. to
pursue his formal education, he worked in the field of satellite-image processing (non-
military usage) for a non-governmental research institute. He immigrated to the U.S. in
1989, when he enrolled as a graduate student at a U.S. university. He earned a
master’s degree in 1992. He has worked for his current employer since 1998.   
He obtained U.S. citizenship in 2002. He decided to become a U.S. citizen after
the 9/11 terrorists attacks, because he then realized that “the United States is the
country [he] belong[s] to.”  In the same vein, the United States is where Applicant has3
lived, worked, and raised his family during the prime of his life, and he intends to
continue to contribute to the U.S. for the balance of his life.4
Concerning the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, the record establishes the
following:5
1. Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of China. He has
regular contact with them via telephone calls. Both parents are retired and about
80 years old. His mother is a retired school teacher. His father is a retired
engineer.  
2. Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of China. He has less contact with her,
perhaps monthly, via telephone calls. His sister is employed as a structural
engineer for a provincial institute. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied
that his sister worked for a Chinese governmental agency. He explained that the
institute is not connected to the Chinese central or state governments, and it
operates like a privately-owned company.   
3. Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of China. His mother-in-law
is a retired university teacher. His father-in-law is a retired chief engineer for a
governmental agency. He has telephonic contact with them about once every two
months. 
4. Applicant bought an apartment in China for his parents in 2007, and they live in
that apartment. He contributed $90,000 (from his savings) and his father
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a6
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).10
4
contributed about $10,000 for the purchase. The deed to the apartment is
registered under his name. He views the purchase of the apartment as his duty
to his parents as the eldest son, in keeping with Chinese tradition. While the
apartment cost about $100,000, the record is silent concerning Applicant’s
financial assets in the U.S., his net worth in the U.S., and his household’s annual
income. 
5. Applicant has some contact with a former coworker. The contact appears to be
limited to special occasions such as the Chinese New Year. 
6. Applicant traveled to China in 2007, when he purchased the apartment for his
parents. He also traveled there in 2002. He intends to travel to China about once
per year. The record is silent as to whether anything untoward happened during
the trips. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As6
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,7
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An8
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  9
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 14
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).15
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating17
conditions). 
5
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An11
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate12
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme13
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.14
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the16
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be17
questioned or put into doubt due to an applicant’s foreign connections and interests.
The overall concern under the guideline is that:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 6. 18
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,19
2001).
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 7(a).20
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 7(e). 21
6
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.18
Of course, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is
not—as a matter of law—disqualifying under Guideline B. But if only one relative resides
in a foreign country and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the
compromise of classified information.19
Based on the record, there are two disqualifying conditions that could raise
security concerns and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case:
Contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a foreign country
if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  and 20
A substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country,
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.21
Here, the two disqualifying conditions apply based on (1) Applicant’s family ties to
his mother, father, sister, and parents-in-law in China, and (2) his ownership of the
Chinese apartment. Clearly, Applicant has strong ties of affection, emotion, or obligation
to his parents as demonstrated by his travel to China to visit them. Those ties are
further demonstrated by Applicant’s actions in purchasing the apartment for his parents.
These circumstances create the potential for a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. This is especially so given that the
foreign country in question is China, which presents real-world concerns. It is not merely
hypothetical to suggest that a brutal communist government like China’s would use
Applicant’s family ties to China as leverage in an attempt to pursue intelligence
gathering. Given these circumstances, his family ties are exploitable relationships in a
foreign-influence context. 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 8(a) – (f).  22
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 8(a). 23
7
The guideline also provides the certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
foreign influence security concerns. The six mitigating conditions  under the guideline22
are:
The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;
There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;
Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence
or exploitation;
The foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or
are approved by the cognizant security authority;
The individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; or 
The value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.
 
The first, third, and sixth mitigating conditions are most pertinent to the facts of this case
and will be discussed below. The others do not apply in Applicant’s favor. 
The first mitigating condition  does not apply because Applicant’s family ties to23
China are of sufficient magnitude or strength to negate it. As noted above, there is a
possibility that certain elements within China could attempt to use his family ties as
leverage in intelligence gathering.  
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 8(c).24
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 8(f).25
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 6.26
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).27
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.28
8
The third mitigating condition  applies to Applicant’s former coworker in China24
due to the limited nature of the contacts or ties. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.e is decided for
Applicant. 
The sixth mitigating condition  might apply to Applicant’s ownership of Chinese25
apartment. But the record does not contain enough information about his overall
financial condition to make a determination. Without that information, it is not possible to
compare the value of his U.S. financial and property interests with the Chinese
apartment, and then assess the likelihood that his ownership of the Chinese apartment
might result in a conflict or be used for foreign exploitation. 
To sum up, this is not a case of “divided loyalties”  with an applicant who has26
one foot in the U.S. and one foot in his native country. The record shows Applicant has
both feet firmly rooted in the U.S., and that he has significant contacts and ties to the
U.S. Looking forward, it is highly unlikely that Applicant will change course. But
Applicant is in the unfortunate situation of having strong family ties to a foreign country
that is ruled by a brutal communist government. His strong family ties to China create a
heightened risk of exploitation that cannot be ruled out. These circumstances are
contrary to the clearly-consistent standard that I am required to apply. Accordingly,
Guideline B is decided against Applicant. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the nine-factor whole-person concept.27
Throughout his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that he would not be loyal
to the United States. Accordingly, it bears repeating that an adverse clearance decision
is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination in terms of28
the national interest that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access to classified information. And here the
guideline at issue is foreign influence, not Applicant’s loyalty.
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
9
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
