FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject Applicant’s
explanation for his failure to disclose information.  The Judge’s unfavorable findings are
sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-06459.a1
DATE: 10/24/2007
DATE: October 24, 2007
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-06459
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 18, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
2
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided
on the written record.  On May 24, 2007, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Joseph
Testan denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to
the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding
Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application was deliberate; whether the Judge’s
unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
(1) Applicant argues that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance application by
failing to disclose 14 debts that had been delinquent for more than 90 or 180 days, as well as an
unpaid Judgement in response to three different questions.  In support of that argument, Applicant
contends that he failed to disclose the information because he was ashamed of his credit history.
Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  His ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guidelines E and J is likewise sustainable.
 
(2) Applicant also argues that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns
raised by his history of financial difficulties had been mitigated because he had paid off most of the
debts and was making payments on the remainder of them.  Again, Applicant’s argument does not
demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.   The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the Guideline F allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly disagrees with
the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or
3
contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision he still had
outstanding debts and was still in the process of making arrangements to repay them.  In light of the
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent and
still ongoing.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at
4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  The Judge specifically noted that Applicant had paid off many of the
debts.  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
