FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The concept of good-faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows
reasonableness, prudence, honesty and adherence to duty or obligation.  Favorable decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 06-14521.a1
DATE: 10/15/2007
DATE: October 15, 2007
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-14521
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 17, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
“The individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. . .”  1
2
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On March 30,  2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael H.
Leonard granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel filed a timely
appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) 20(d)  is unsupported by the facts and1
is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law; and whether the Judge’s whole person analysis is
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant, an engineer for a federal
contractor, owed money to several creditors.  One, in the amount of $983 owed to a bank, was sold
to a collection agency.  It became the subject of a court-ordered judgement against Applicant.  He
paid the debt off by means of a garnishment of his annual bonus and by a personal check.  This debt
was satisfied in February 2007.
Another debt, which has not been paid off as of the date of the hearing, is in the amount of
$8,895, for a credit card account.  Applicant has set up a repayment plan whereby he will make
monthly payments of $500 until the debt is extinguished.  He made his first payment on February
20, 2007.  Applicant also owed $112.09 to another creditor, which he paid in January 2007.  
Applicant owes $53 for telephone services.  He has contacted the creditor but has been unable
to find any record of this debt.  It remains unpaid.  
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce in 2001, with the result that he had to pay $1465
per month in child support, subsequently reduced to $965 per month.  Applicant remarried in 2006.
His current wife is employed by the same company as Applicant, their combined household income
being higher than $100,000 a year.  Applicant no longer has credit cards, and the balance on his
401(k) plan is about $125,000.  
Department Counsel argues that the record does not support the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant has met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  Specifically, Department Counsel
contends that Applicant has not demonstrated a track record of debt repayment but that his case rests
largely on his promises of future good behavior, noting that other than the garnishment action,
Applicant’s only voluntary efforts at debt repayment occurred close to the date of the hearing.  In
Department Counsel’s view, this precludes favorable application of FCMC 20(d).
In an earlier case the Board addressed the meaning of “good faith effort” in the following
manner: 
In order to qualify for application of [this mitigating condition] an applicant must
present evidence showing either a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
some other good faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts.  The Directive
does not define the term “good faith.”  However, the Board has indicated that the
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (internal citations omitted).  2
“. . . I have called [the creditor].  I also called the number that was in the credit report . . . I’ve tried all the3
contact numbers from the credit report and also calling [the creditor], and they have no account or no records of this
particular balance. . . I have called [the creditor], talked to their billing department and everything, gave them the account
numbers, my name, all that stuff, and they weren’t able to find that record.”  Tr. at 40-41.    
3
concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”
Accordingly, an applicant must do more that show that he or she relied on a legally
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [this mitigating
condition].   2
In Applicant’s case, all but one of the debts have either been paid off or, as with the credit
card account, Applicant has established a repayment plan acceptable to the creditor.  Evidence
supplied by Applicant shows that he has started making payments under this plan.  The only debt that
has not been even partially satisfied is the one for $53, for which Applicant testified that he has been
unable to verify.   We note Department Counsel’s point about the recency of Applicant’s repayment3
efforts; nevertheless, the Judge’s unchallenged findings support the conclusion that these efforts are
reasonable, prudent, and honest attempts to honor by his financial obligations.  The Judge’s findings
concerning Applicant’s stable domestic situation is consistent with this view as well.  Applicant’s
case is to be distinguished, therefore, from one in which the debtor relies principally on bankruptcy,
the statute of limitations, etc., as an effort to get out of debt.  In light of his unchallenged findings
and the record as a whole, the Judge has articulated a rational connection between those findings and
his conclusion that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion.  See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of
the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)); ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Directive  ¶  E3.1.15. (“The applicant is responsible for presenting
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security clearance.”)  The Judge’s conclusion concerning the application of FCMC 20(d)
reflects a plausible, legally permissible interpretation of the record evidence.
We further conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis complies with the requirements
of Directive  ¶  E2.2.1, in that he considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching his
decision.  See ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 6 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006).  In light of the forgoing, we
hold that the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is neither arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.
4
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.    
   
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan              
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
