 
                                                                                                                                          
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        DATE:  October 9, 2007 
 
 
  
 ) 
In re: )  
 ) 
 --------------------- ) ADP Case No. 06-13528 
 SSN: ----------- )  
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE 
MARK W. HARVEY 
 
 
APPEARANCES 
 
FOR GOVERNMENT 
Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
FOR APPLICANT 
Pro Se 
 
 
SYNOPSIS 
 
Applicant had 14 delinquent debts, totaling $21,567. He admitted the 14 debts 
were delinquent, and that he was unable to pay or resolve them.  He did not offer any 
explanation for his delinquent debts. The trustworthiness concerns pertaining to 
financial considerations are not mitigated. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
On August 19, 2004, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Positions (SF 85P).1 On November 27, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,2 under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a eligibility 
for a public trust position for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
In an answer dated January 8, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.4 A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 11, 2007, was 
provided to him on July 27, 2007, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.5 Submissions 
were due by August 26, 2007.6 Applicant did not provide any submissions. The case 
was assigned to me on September 26, 2007. 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.n. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
                                                          
1Item 5 (Standard Form (SF) 85P, Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions, dated August 
19, 2004). There is no allegation of falsification of this SF 85P. 
 
2Item 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated November 27, 2006). 
 
3On August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The revised Adjudicative Guidelines apply to this case. 
 
4Item 4 (Applicant’s response to SOR, dated January 8, 2007).  
 
5Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated July 12, 2007, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated July 27, 2007.  
 
6Id. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s 
receipt to submit information.  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
3
Applicant is 47 years old.7 He married in September 1987. He has two 
children, who were born in 1990 and 1995. He was on active duty in the Air Force 
from 1981 to 1984. He received his high school diploma in 1978. From April 1999 
until he completed his SF85, he was employed by the same company.   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR listed 14 delinquent debts, ranging from $60 to $9,606, and totaling 
$21,567. In his response to interrogatories, dated September 7, 2006, Applicant said 
he could not make any payments on his delinquent debts.  Department Counsel asked 
for any information that might assist in making a trustworthiness clearance 
determination, Applicant responded: 
 
I realize my credit is bad, but I will get it under control.  But I would 
never do anything to hurt my company, my country, and the people I 
work with. I would never do anything to make my company mistrust 
me. I am loyal to my company and to my country. This is my oath. I 
love my job and I will not do anything to ever jeopardize my job. I 
want to keep my job! I promise I am worthy of my company’s trust, 
and my country’s trust. I have a Honorable Discharge from the USAF. I 
faithfully served my country then, and as for my job now, I will 
likewise faithfully serve my company and my country.    
  
In the FORM at page 4, Department Counsel stated: 
 
To date, he has taken no action to resolve [his delinquent debts], even 
[though] more than eight months [have elapsed] after it was formally 
brought to his attention as a security concern.  Moreover, Applicant’s 
debts remain unresolved and there is no evidence that he is making 
progress toward mitigating concerns to support a favorable 
trustworthiness determination.  
  
 As indicated previously, Applicant did not respond to the FORM.  He did not 
offer any explanation for how his debts became delinquent, or explain why he had 
not made any payments or describe other efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
  
POLICIES 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s trustworthiness determination, an 
administrative judge must consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information” (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AGs are divided into Disqualifying 
                                                          
7Item 5, supra n. 1, is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless otherwise stated.   
 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
4
Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are used to determine an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified or sensitive information. 
 
 These AGs are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these AGs in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. AG ¶ 2. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
common sense decision. Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge 
should consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
 An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) 
the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
 
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, 
the final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny 
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information 
will be resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts by “substantial evidence,”8 demonstrating, in 
accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. Once the 
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the 
burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and 
[applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating 
                                                          
8 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from 
the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” 
Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
5
condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).9 
 
A person seeking access to classified or sensitive information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. 
This relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty 
hours. It is because of this special relationship the government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to such information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail 
to protect or safeguard classified or sensitive information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, 
risk of compromise of such information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism.  Executive Order 10865, § 7.  
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
  
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the Government’s concern concerning financial problems. 
“Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal 
acts to generate funds.” 
  
  Two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions raise a 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).   
 
                                                          
 
9“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions 
of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
6
  Applicant admitted he had 14 delinquent debts, totaling $21,567, as of 
September 2006. The amount of delinquent debt was substantial, and Applicant did 
not contest the assertion in the FORM that he did not pay or otherwise resolve any 
of the delinquent debts.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
After careful consideration, I conclude none of these mitigating conditions 
apply. He did not show unusual circumstances caused his financial problems. His 
overall conduct with his creditors casts some doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He did not indicate he was unemployed or 
underemployed. He did not prove his debts resulted from medical problems. He did 
not disclose any information indicating his actions were in good faith. He did not 
provide evidence of aggressive and responsible efforts to resolve his delinquent 
debt. He has not provided evidence showing he maintained communications with his 
SOR creditors. There was no evidence of “clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control.” He did not provide “documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of the dispute or [provide] evidence of actions to resolve the issue” with 
respect to his delinquent debts. In sum, he has failed to demonstrate sufficient effort 
to resolve financial concerns, or that his debts resulted from circumstances beyond 
his control.      
 
“Whole Person” Analysis 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
7
 
In addition to the facts discussed in the enumerated disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, I have considered the general adjudicative guideline related to 
the whole person concept under AG ¶ 2(a). There is no reason to believe his actions 
with respect to his debts were not knowledgeable and voluntary. He is 47 years old, 
sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. The most probable 
motivation for his failure to pay his debts is insufficient income. Failure to pay debts 
is not prudent or responsible.    
 
The current process has made him aware of the necessity to ensure his finances 
are not delinquent. “Applicant is now alert to the [trustworthiness] concerns presented 
by his circumstances and the responsibilities incumbent on him as a result.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-07360 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006). The absence of evidence of any 
prior violation of his employer’s rules or requirements weighs in his favor.     
 
After considering all the circumstances, however, his delinquent debts 
significantly increase the trustworthiness concerns. The minimal evidence he 
presented of rehabilitation is insufficient to resolve my doubts about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
        
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  not 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to financial considerations. The 
evidence leaves me with doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”10 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the AGs. 
Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for a public trust position. 
 
  
FORMAL FINDINGS 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1n.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
10See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
8
DECISION 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge  
