FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Information submitted after the Judge has reached a decision is not a basis for error. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-11767.a1
DATE: 10/01/2007
DATE: October 1, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-11767
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On August 31, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
Applicant points out that the Judge’s decision states that she is an unsuitable candidate for an Information1
Systems position, while she is a Senior TRICARE Network Field Representative.  This does not constitute harmful error,
since Applicant’s job requires the same trustworthiness determination as an Information Systems position. 
2
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided upon the written record.  On March 30, 2007,
after considering the record, Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr. denied Applicant’s request
for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, the
brief consists of a more detailed account of the accrual of Applicant’s debts–along with extensive
attachments about her bankruptcy, as well as training certificates and letters of recommendation from
her employer.  Almost all the information Applicant provided in her brief is new information which
she did not provide earlier.  The Board cannot consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive
E3.1.29.  
In her brief, Applicant states that she did not understand the depth of information requested
from her earlier in the trustworthiness determination process.  Applicant had opportunities to present
all the information she wished the Judge to consider in her trustworthiness determination.  She
answered DOHA Interrogatories and submitted an affidavit about her financial situation.  She
responded to the SOR which she received.  After the File of Relevant Material was completed in her
case, she submitted additional information for consideration.  That information was added to the
record for the Judge’s consideration.  Applicant does not contend that she did not receive adequate
instruction on what materials to submit or that the Judge did not consider all the information she
submitted before the record was closed.  Information submitted by an applicant after the Judge has
reached a decision is not a basis for error.  1
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party
has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of
error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant access to
automated information systems in ADP I/II/III sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
