FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: A decision in another DOHA Hearing Office case does not demonstrate error by the
Judge.  Nor is it legally binding precedent on other Judges or the Board.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 06-18340.a1
DATE: 10/03/2007
DATE: October 3, 2007
In Re:
-------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-18340
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 28, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.c through 1.f.  Those favorable1
findings are not at issue on appeal.
The Board construes Applicant’s brief as arguing that the Judge erred in not applying Guideline H Mitigating2
Conditions 26(a)( “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”);
26(b)(“a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as :(1) disassociation form drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation”); and 26(d)(“satisfactory
completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional”).
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 20, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Robert J. Tuider
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision under Guideline H is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  1
Applicant argues that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns raised under
Guideline H had been mitigated, as a matter of law, because Applicant’s marijuana use was not
recent, and Applicant had demonstrated that he would not use drugs in the future and had provided
clear evidence of rehabilitation.  In support of this argument, Applicant submits additional2
documentary evidence which was not submitted at the hearing.  He also cites to several DOHA
Hearing Office decisions in which an applicant in ostensibly similar circumstances was granted a
clearance.  Given the totality of the record evidence, Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that
the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Board may not consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Its submission does not demonstrate error on the part of the Administrative Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 02-12789 at 3 (App. Bd. May 13, 2005). 
The decision in another DOHA Hearing Office case does not demonstrate error by the Judge
in this case.  A decision by a Hearing Office Judge is not legally binding precedent on that Judge’s
colleagues or the Board.  See ISCR Case No. 01-22606 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2003).
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn
simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case. Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.” See
ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  “Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.”  See
ISCR Case No. 05-02833 (App. Bd. Mar.19, 2007).  “As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence,
or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability
The Judge found Applicant’s use of cocaine, psilocybin mushrooms, PCP, and LSD to be mitigated.3
Applicant’s Exhibit B is a statement, signed by Applicant, in which he swears never to use illegal drugs again.4
He further states that he expects that any violation of this promise will result in the automatic revocation of his clearance.
See Guideline H Mitigating Condition 26(b)(4).  This is evidence which a Judge must consider, but it is not binding.
Rather, its mitigating effect must be evaluated in light of the record as a whole.  
3
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy history of marijuana use.
That history included illegal marijuana use, on at least 1,000 occasions and at times including daily
use, from approximately 1977 to January 2005.  It also included the illegal purchase of marijuana
during the same period of time.  A review of the decision indicates that the Judge weighed the
mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the record evidence relating to the length,
seriousness and recency of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  The Judge found in favor of the Applicant
with respect to four of the factual allegations.   However, the Judge reasonably explained why the3
evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all the
government’s security concerns.   The Board does not review a case de novo.  Given the record that4
was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline H is not
arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12548  at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep.
18, 2006).
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
