FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  The Judge’s material findings
reflect a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-23748.a1
DATE: 10/11/2007
DATE: October 11, 2007
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23748
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 30, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f.  Those1
favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
For example, Applicant notes that in the whole-person section of his decision, the Judge stated that when2
Applicant received an equity line of credit, instead of paying off his delinquent bills, he purchased a motorcycle and
remodeled his house.  Applicant’s Brief at 1-2; Decision at 6-7.  Applicant argues that one reason he purchased the
motorcycle was because it saved him approximately $140 a month on gas.
2
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On May 3, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable clearance
decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1
Applicant contends that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns raised
by his multiple unpaid debts had been mitigated.  In support of that contention, Applicant notes that
the Judge found in his favor with respect to five of the nine SOR allegations.  Applicant also argues
that he has acted reasonably in his efforts to resolve the debts that are the subject of the four
remaining SOR allegations that the Judge found against him on.  He further complains that the Judge
drew certain unfavorable inferences from the record evidence, when that evidence in fact supported
a favorable inference.   Applicant’s brief  essentially reargues his case with respect to the evidence2
he presented at the hearing, and provides addition statements as to the circumstances of his financial
situation.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Therefore,
the Board may not consider Applicant’s additional explanations as to the circumstances of his
financial situation, and they do not demonstrate error on the part of the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 06-00799 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 16, 2007). 
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  Considering the record as a whole, the Judge’s material findings, and the inferences drawn
from those findings, reflect a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence and are supported by
substantial evidence.
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
3
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn
simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-09462 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul.19, 2007).  “Thus, the presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03452 at
3 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  “An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence,
or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate
that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the security concerns raised by Applicant’s unpaid debts had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision, he still had
significant outstanding debts and was still in the process of trying to resolve his financial problems.
In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems
were still ongoing and presented a security concern.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-00799 at 2 (App.
Bd. Apr. 16, 2007).  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  He found in favor of Applicant with respect
to five of the SOR allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which
the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all of the government’s
security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo. The favorable record evidence cited
by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  The Board does not
review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
