Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),1
dated January 2, 1992, as amended.
DATE:  October 9, 2007
In re:
-------------------------
SSN: -------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25903
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CLAUDE R. HEINY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant owes approximately $21,600 on 14 delinquent accounts, which remain unpaid.
The record evidence is insufficient to mitigate or extenuate the negative security implications based
on financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On April 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating that DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding  it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for1
2
Applicant. The SOR set forth reasons why a security clearance could not be granted or continued
due to financial considerations security concerns.
On June 11, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated June 27, 2007. Applicant was sent a copy of the FORM, along with notice
of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
potentially disqualifying conditions. On August 23, 2007, Applicant responded to the FORM.
Department Counsel did not object to the material. Applicant’s response was admitted into the
record. On September 28, 2007, I was assigned the case. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The SOR alleges security concerns based on financial considerations. Applicant admits the
14 debts listed in the SOR. The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 25-year-old security associate who has worked for a defense contractor since
January 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  In 2006, Applicant’s gross salary was
$2,960, her net salary was $2,160, and her partner’s net income was $3,440. Together their net
monthly income was $5,600 with $2,200 in monthly expenses. (Item 9) In June 2007, Applicant
stated she was separated from her partner who failed to help in paying the joint debts.  In August
2007, Applicant stated her net monthly income was not $3,400 and her boyfriend had his own
expenses beside the home expenses, as previously listed. (Applicant’s response to FORM)
In August 2004, Applicant separated as an E-4 from the U.S. Army and returned home. She
was on active duty from July 2000 through March 2004. (Item 4) Her separation from the Army
contributed to her inability to fulfill her financial obligations. 
Applicant obtained a $11,957 car loan (SOR 1.d) from a credit union. The vehicle was
involuntarily repossessed when she could not make the $311 monthly payments.  She agreed to
repay the creditor $500 per month on the amount she owed following repossession. In February
2007, Applicant asserted she would be contacting the company about this debt. 
Applicant purchased a $1,213 computer (SOR 1.I).  She failed to make her payments.  The
debt is now $1,785. (Item 5)
In April 2006, Applicant’s Federal income tax refund was intercepted to pay a $1,375 debt
to the military exchange service. In November 2006, Applicant settled a credit card debt for
$448.78. In June 2007, Applicant received financial credit counseling, which is required of
individuals wishing to file for bankruptcy protection. In August 2007, Applicant stated she would
file for bankruptcy protection when she had saved enough to pay for the bankruptcy. (Applicant’s
response to FORM)
Applicant asserts she has established repayment plans or contacted the creditors about some
of her debts.  However, Applicant did not provide documentation the debts were paid or a repayment
plan was established. 
3
The FORM contains four credit reports dated June 2005 (Item 7), December 2006 (Item 6),
January 2007 (Item 4), and March 2007 (Item 5). 
Creditor Amount Current Status
1 a Cell phone debt. $950 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
had set up a repayment plan related to this debt.
(Items 4, 6, 7) No supporting documentation
received. 
2 b Telephone debt. $1,714 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
working on setting up a repayment plan related to
this debt. (Items 4, 6, 7)
3 c Emergency
physicians medical
bill. 
$205 Unpaid. In Applicant’s January 2007 credit report,
$205 was owed. (Items 4, 6, 7)
4 d Credit Union debt
for involuntary
auto  repossession. 
$9,260 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
would be contacting the company about this debt.
(Items 4, 5, 7, 8)
5 e Credit card debt. $288 Unpaid.  In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
would be making a payment on this debt. (Item 4)
6 f Credit card debt. $4,902 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
was making payments on this debt. (Item 4) In
Applicant’s January 2007 credit report $5,902 had
been transferred. (Item 4)  No supporting
documentation received. 
7 g Telephone debt. $240 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
working on setting up a repayment plan related to
this debt. (Items 4, 6, 7)
8 h Electric bill. $183 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
would be contacting the company about this debt.
(Items 4, 5, 6, 8)
9 i Computer
purchase. 
$1,785 Unpaid. In Applicant’s March 2007 credit report,
$1,765 was owed. (Items 5, 8)
10 j Telephone debt. $255 Unpaid. In Applicant’s January 2007 credit report,
$255 was owed. (Item 4)
11 k Medical debt for
emergency room
visit.
$316 Unpaid. In Applicant’s January 2007 credit report,
$316 was owed. (Items 4, 6, 7)
12 l Collection account
for telephone debt. 
$407 Unpaid. In Applicant’s March 2007 credit report,
$407 was owed. (Item 5)
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.152
4
13 m Debt. $1,024 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
would be contacting the company about this debt.
(Item 4)
14 n Collection account
for cable bill. 
$99 Unpaid. In February 2007, Applicant asserted she
would be making a payment on this debt. (Items 4,
7)
$21,628 Total debt listed in SOR
POLICIES
The Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information, dated August 2006, sets forth Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating
Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each decision must be a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole person concept, and the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive. The adjudicative
guidelines are to be applied by administrative judges on a case-by-case basis with an eye toward
making determinations that are clearly consistent with the interests of national security. The
presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not determinative
of a conclusion for or against an applicant.  However, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole,
I conclude the relevant guidelines to be applied here are Guideline F, financial considerations.
BURDEN OF PROOF
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant. Initially, the
Government must establish, by substantial evidence, that conditions exist in the personal or
professional history of the applicant which disqualify, or may disqualify, an applicant from being
eligible for access to classified information. The burden of proof in a security clearance case is
something less than a preponderance of evidence, although the government is required to present
substantial evidence to meet its burden of proof.  Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but
less than a preponderance of the evidence. All that is required is proof of facts and circumstances
which indicate an applicant is at risk for mishandling classified information, or that an applicant
does not demonstrate the high degree of judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons
handling classified information.  Additionally, the government must prove controverted facts alleged
in the SOR.  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to present
evidence to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government's case.  Additionally, an applicant has the
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.2
As noted by the United States Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
528 (1988), “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” A person who has access to classified
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence.
5
The government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national
security.  Security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. 
CONCLUSIONS
The Government has satisfied its initial burden of proof under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon terms.
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a history of
serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is inconsistent with the holding
of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is required to manage her
finances so as to meet her financial obligations.
Financial considerations become a security concern when a person has significant delinquent
debts. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal or
unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an individual who is
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to
protect classified information.  Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
Applicant owes approximately $21,600 on 14 delinquent debts.  Disqualifying Conditions
(DC) 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations” apply. 
In April 2006, Applicant’s Federal income tax refund was intercepted to pay a debt to the
military exchange service and she settled a credit card debt. However, neither of these debts were
listed in the SOR.  Of the unpaid delinquent accounts, not all of the debts are large debts. More than
half the debts are approximately $400 or less. There is no documentation that any of the debts listed
in the SOR have been paid.  
Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(b) “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances,” has very limited applicability.  Applicant asserts her separation from the Army
contributed to her inability to fulfill her financial obligations. Additionally, she separated from her
partner who failed to help pay the joint debts. The impact of these events on her finances is not
further described. Applicant has failed to explain how the events caused the financial problems.
Without additional information, it is impossible to find that the events caused the debts or that
Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
Only two of the debts in question are related to medical bills (SOR 1.c $205 and SOR 1.k
$316).  These two medical debts do not establish Applicant’s financial problem was caused by
unexpected medical emergency. 
6
 Applicant has sought financial counseling to qualify for bankruptcy. She asserts she will file
for bankruptcy when she has sufficient funds to pay the expense of bankruptcy. She has not
demonstrated a positive change in her financial management. The debts remain unpaid. There is no
indication the problem is being resolved or under control.  MC 2(c) “the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control,” does not apply. 
MC 20(d) “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” applies. For MC 20(d) to apply there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the
“desire” to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of
handling her debts is needed, which is not present here. Applicant asserts she has entered into a
repayment agreement with some of the creditors.  She failed to document the agreements. She has
provided nothing to substantiate her claim of a repayment agreement. She has not provided a plan
for paying her delinquent obligations.  
In reaching my conclusions I have also considered: the nature, extent, and seriousness of the
conduct; Applicant’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the
conduct; Applicant’s voluntary and knowledgeable participation; the motivation for the conduct; the
frequency and recency of the conduct; presence or absence of rehabilitation; potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the probability that the circumstance or conduct will continue
or recur in the future. I find against Applicant as to financial considerations.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7, of Enclosure 1 of the Directive are
hereby rendered as follows:
Paragraph 1 Financial Considerations: AGAINST FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
DECISION
7
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Claude R. Heiny 
Administrative Judge
