DATE:  October 26, 2007
In re:
---------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-26054
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
PHILIP S. HOWE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is 29 years old, unmarried, and works as an electrical engineer for a defense
contractor.  He and his family come from the Middle East, specifically Jordan.  Three brothers and
Applicant came to the United States over the past 20 years to obtain an education, to live, and to
work.  Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns.  Clearance
is granted.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended1
and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive).
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant.  On March 16, 2007, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons  (SOR)1
detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference)
and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Directive.  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on
March 28, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge.  The case was
assigned to me on July 17, 2007.  On August 8, 2007, I convened a hearing to consider whether it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
The Government and the Applicant submitted exhibits that were admitted into evidence.  I
left the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional exhibits.  Those exhibits were sent and
received at DOHA within the allowed time period.  The Government had no objection to them, and
I admitted them into evidence as Exhibits C through F (Tr. 66).  DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2007.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of the facts in Exhibit 2.  Department
Counsel also provided supporting documents to show the basis for the facts in Exhibit 2.  Applicant
had no objection to administrative notice of the facts in Exhibit 2.
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004);
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3  Cir. 1986).  The mostrd
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well
known or from government reports.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice).  I took administrative notice of various
facts derived from Ex. 2 as indicated under the subheadings “Jordan,” “Saudi Arabia,” and “Kuwait”
of this decision.
The Government moved to amend the SOR with two amendments.  Applicant did not object
to either amendment, so I granted them both.  The first amendment was to add Subparagraph 2.e
under Guideline B, the language, “e. You traveled to Jordan in 2000.” (Tr. 7)  The second
amendment was to change the language in Subparagraph 2.c., to read, “One of your sisters is a
citizen of Jordan and a resident of Saudi Arabia.” (Tr. 104, 105)
3
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant's admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated here as findings of fact.
Applicant denied the Paragraph C and B security concerns, and denied Subparagraph 2.c. of the
SOR.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and full consideration of
that evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is 29 years old, unmarried, and the youngest of eight children.  He was born in
Kuwait.  He immigrated to the United States in 1998 to attend college.  He completed his bachelor’s
and master’s degrees in engineering in the United States, graduating with his masters degree in 2006.
He became a U.S. citizen in 2004.  Applicant’s parents sent him and his brothers to the U.S. to be
educated.  They and his brothers paid for Applicant’s college and advanced degree.  Applicant does
not own any property outside the United States, and rents an apartment in the city in which he works.
None of his family members know the type of work he does, because he tells them he works for a
power supply company as an electrical engineer. (Tr. 25-28, 30, 45-48, 74, 75, 84; Exhibit 1)
Applicant has seven older siblings:
  
The oldest brother lives in Kuwait and has dual Jordanian/Canadian citizenship.  This brother
always worked for private engineering companies.  Applicant speaks with this brother only on
holidays, and has not spoken with him in 2007.  They do have infrequent email communications with
each other.  
Applicant’s second oldest brother lives in the United States, is a U.S. citizen, owns his home,
and has a business.  He is a married and has four children.  His wife came from Jordan, but is also
a naturalized U.S. citizen.  
The third oldest brother is a Canadian resident and citizen, and also is a Jordanian dual
citizen.  Applicant talks to him about every three months.  His wife is a native-born Canadian. He
has two children, and has not returned to Jordan since he married in Canada.  
Applicant’s fourth brother lives in the United States, and is a naturalized citizen.  His
children were born in the United States.  The fourth brother traveled to Jordan about four years ago.
The fifth brother also lives in the United States and is a naturalized citizen.  His wife is from Jordan
originally.  They have three children.  
Applicant also has two sisters.  One sister is a citizen resident of Jordan.  She is married to
a man in the import and export business in Jordan.  They have three children.  Applicant saw her in
2000 on his trip to Jordan, and he speaks with her once or twice a year.  She has never been to the
United States.  He also visited with her once a week when he was working in Jordan in 2006 on
assignment from his employer.  He has not had contact with her since his return from Jordan in
March 2007.  
The youngest sister is a citizen of Jordan residing with her family in Saudi Arabia.  Her
husband is an electrical engineer.  Applicant speaks with this sister once or twice a year.  He last saw
this sister in the summer of 2006 in Jordan. (Tr. 31-33, 51-74, 105; Exhibit 1)
4
Applicant’s parents live in Jordan.  They have U.S. “green cards,” and have had the cards
since the 1970s.  They travel to the United States annually to spend four or five months with
Applicant and his three brothers who live here.  When they are in the United States, Applicant visits
with them frequently.  He speaks with them once a week when they are in Jordan. (Tr. 26-28, 27, 50,
75, 76, 79, 88; Exhibit 1)
Applicant traveled to Jordan to visit his parents in 2000 for three months, taking his niece
and nephew with him.  On that trip he used his Jordanian passport.  His next trip to Jordan was in
August 2006, when his employer sent him to work in Jordan until March 2007, pursuant to a
technical assistance contract with the Jordanian armed forces.  He obtained advance approval
recorded on a company form for that trip.  He also signed the necessary export compliance and
request forms, as required by law.  On that trip he used only his U.S. passport.  Applicant is
recognized by Jordanian officers and other personnel who work with Applicant’s employer on the
contract when they saw him in the plant in the United States and on site in Jordan as someone who
originally came from Jordan and speaks Arabic, so they feel comfortable with him.  Applicant has
no present plans to travel to Jordan for business or family visits.  On his trip in 2006, he visited with
his parents three or four times a week. (Tr. 21, 66-68, 72, 77, 78, 90-93; Exhibits 1, A-F)
Applicant has a Jordanian passport.  He renewed it on June 9, 2003, at the request of the U.S.
immigration authorities so he would have a current passport before Applicant took his citizenship
exam and became a U.S. citizen.  It expires on June 9, 2008.  Applicant does not use the Jordanian
passport now that he has a U.S. passport.  After retrieving the Jordanian passport from one of his
brother’s house, he surrendered the Jordanian passport to his employer’s security officer, who put
it in Applicant’s security file.  If Applicant were to reclaim that passport, the employer would make
an entry on the JPAS system of that action.  Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant only uses the
U.S. passport for travel. (Tr. 23, 77, 78, 82-86, 89; Exhibit B)
Applicant has Jordanian citizenship along with his Jordanian passport.  Applicant expressed
a willingness to renounce his Jordanian citizenship.  He has read in the Jordanian newspapers the
lists of persons who have renounced their Jordanian citizenship.  Applicant is of the belief that such
a renunciation would make him an enemy of Jordan in the eyes of Jordanian officials, including
those to come to his employer’s plant.  Applicant is concerned that because his company has a
contract to do work for Jordan, if he renounces his citizenship he will be put in a difficult position.
If there is no need to renounce it now, he would prefer not to do so, so he can continue to work on
that contract for his company.  Applicant also told the Government investigator that he was willing
to renounce his Jordanian citizenship. (Tr. 23, 85-94)
Jordan is a small, Middle Eastern country governed by a constitutional monarchy.   It has a
pro-Western foreign policy, and has had close relations with the United States for more than forty
years.  Torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, overcrowded prisons, denial of due process, and
restrictions on freedom of speech are Jordanian human rights problems.  Despite governmental
efforts against terrorism, the threat posed by terrorists remains high in Jordan.  Terrorists target U.S.
interests to undermine U.S. national security interests.  Terrorist groups conduct intelligence
activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (Exhibit 2)
Saudi Arabia is a monarchy with a consultative council appointed by the monarch.  That
council came into existence in 1992.  The United States and Saudi Arabia share a common concern
5
about regional security, oil exports and imports, sustainable development, and counter-terrorism
efforts.  There are some concerns about human rights in Saudi Arabia, including abuse of prisoners,
incommunicado detentions, restrictions on freedom of speech, press, peaceful assembly and
association, religion, discrimination against women and minorities, and suppression of worker’s
rights.  Islamic Law governs the country. (Exhibit 2)
Kuwait is a constitutional hereditary emirate.  It has an elected legislature.  Kuwait has some
human rights issues, including maltreatment of prisoners, unlawful deprivation of life, incomplete
judicial independence, restricted freedoms of press, speech, assembly, association and religion,
corruption, and human trafficking.  Kuwaiti citizens constitute only 34% of the population of 2.9
million people.  The citizens have a generous social welfare system financed by oil revenues.
Kuwait condemned terrorism in various public forums, changed its laws on money laundering, and
made other changes to combat terrorism.  However, the risk of a terrorist attack in Kuwait remains
high because the Kuwaiti government is reluctant to confront domestic extremists, and supporters
of terrorism active in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Kuwait lacks strong legal provisions to combat
conspiracies to commit terrorism.  In 2006, Kuwait opened its World Moderation Center to combat
terrorism and promote moderation among Muslims through education, training, international
dialogue, and research. (Exhibit 2)
Applicant’s co-workers, friends, and former supervisors submitted letters on his behalf.
Applicant is regarded by them as hard-working, dependable, smart, conscientious, cooperative, and
a team player.  They also regard him as a man of integrity and honesty. (Tr. 24; Exhibit B)
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently
trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.”  Id. at
527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent the
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information with Industry
§ 2 (Feb. 20, 1960).  Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the
security guidelines contained in the Directive.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3.
The adjudication process is based on the whole person concept.  All available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, is to be taken into account in reaching a decision as
to whether a person is an acceptable security risk.  Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC)
under each guideline that must be carefully considered in making the overall common sense
determination required.  
In evaluating the security worthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also
assess the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive.  Those assessments include:
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
and the extent of knowledgeable participation; (3) how recent and frequent the behavior was; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence (See Directive, Section E2.2.1. of Enclosure 2). Because each security
case presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it should not be assumed that the factors
exhaust the realm of human experience or that the factors apply equally in every case.  Moreover,
although adverse information concerning a single condition may not be sufficient for an unfavorable
determination, the individual may be disqualified if available information reflects a recent or
recurring pattern of questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or other behavior specified in the
Guidelines.
The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as
to the loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.  It is merely an indication that the applicant
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for
issuing a clearance.
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal
or professional history of the applicant that disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being
eligible for access to classified information.  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the disqualifying conditions listed in the guidelines and an
applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  All that
is required is proof of facts and circumstances that indicate an applicant is at risk for mishandling
classified information, or that an applicant does not demonstrate the high degree of judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons handling classified information.  ISCR Case No.
00-0277, 2001 DOHA LEXIS 335 at **6-8 (App. Bd. 2001).  Once the Government has established
a prima facie case by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating that is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 2002).  “Any doubt as to whether access to
classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor of the
national security.” Directive ¶ E2.2.2.  “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must,
on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  See Exec. Or. 12968 § 3.1(b).
Based upon a consideration of the evidence as a whole, I find the following adjudicative
guidelines most pertinent to an evaluation of the facts of this case:
Guideline C:  The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. ¶9
Guideline B:  The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help
a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under this Guideline can
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial
7
interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country
is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with
a risk of terrorism. ¶6
CONCLUSIONS
Foreign Preference:  Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004.  He holds a current Jordanian
passport.  It remains current until June, 2008.  He has dual citizenship with Jordan. 
The Government established a prima facie case under this guideline.  The Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) that could raise a security concern and be disqualifying are the exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen, to include but not be
limited to possession of a current foreign passport. ¶10.a.1.
Applicant was born in Kuwait and his parents live in Jordan.  Applicant expressed a
willingness to renounce his dual citizenship, both at the hearing and to the Government investigator.
Before he became a U.S. citizen, Applicant obtained a renewal of his Jordanian passport in 2003,
when that passport was about to expire.  He contends the U.S. immigration personnel told him to
renew the Jordanian passport so he would have a valid passport before the final decision and action
on his application for U.S. citizenship.  He has used only the U.S. passport since becoming a U.S.
citizen.  He surrendered the Jordanian passport to his employer’s security officer for holding.
Applicant did not have possession of that passport before he surrendered it, because he had one of
his brothers keep it for him.
Four of the Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply.  Applicant’s dual citizenship is based solely
on his parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country.  Applicant is the youngest of eight children
and was born where his parents resided in 1979, which was Kuwait (¶11.a).  Applicant repeatedly
expressed a willingness to renounce his Jordanian citizenship (¶11.b).  The Jordanian passport was
obtained and renewed before Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004 (¶11.c).  His Jordanian
passport he surrendered to his company’s security officer, who placed it in Applicant’s security file.
If Applicant seeks to have it returned to him before, or even after it expires in 2008, the security
officer declared it would be noted on the Government JPAS computer system in an incident report.
(¶11.e)
Foreign Influence:  Applicant has family members, siblings and parents, living in Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, and Jordan.  He also has three brothers in the United States, and a fourth brother in
Canada.  If Applicant has contact with relatives in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient
to create potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified
information.  Applicant has frequent contact with his parents.  He has less contact with his siblings
in Jordan, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.  He communicates frequently with his three brothers in the
United States.  His close relationship with his parents creates a heightened risk of foreign pressure
or attempted exploitation because terrorists in the Middle East seek intelligence and are hostile to
the United States.  A security concern arises because Applicant may desire to help his parents or
siblings in a particular situation.  
8
The Government presented substantial evidence of two disqualifying conditions.  The
condition that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying which is applicable here is
¶7.a (contact with a foreign family member who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion), and ¶7.b (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information).  The burden now shifts to the Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition.  The Government never has to prove the applicability of a mitigating condition.
Two mitigating conditions are potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions:
¶8.a the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of
having to choose between the interests of the foreign individual and the interests of
the U.S.; and, 
¶8.b there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. 
Applicant has a sufficient relationship with his parents, and a lesser relationship with his
three siblings in the Middle East, which make ¶8.a inapplicable.  There is a remote possibility that
terrorists could attempt to coerce or threaten Applicant through his parents or three siblings.  He
might be placed in the situation of having to choose between his family members and the interests
of the United States.
Applicant showed ¶8.b applied.  He established a sufficient relationship and depth of loyalty
to the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United
States.  He came to the United States in 1998 for his education.  Three of his brothers followed the
same path prior to Applicant, pushed by their parents who realized their children would  have a better
life in the United States than elsewhere.  He became a U.S. citizen in 2004.  Since arriving in the
United States, Applicant made only one voluntary trip back to Jordan.  His 2006 trip was at the
direction of his employer.  In preparation of that trip, Applicant complied with all filing and
disclosure requirements.  Applicant likes his job, and is closer to his siblings in the United States
than to those in the Middle East.  His parents have green cards, and spend nearly half of each year
in the United States visiting Applicant and his siblings.  Applicant has no property or assets outside
the United States.  He uses only his U.S. passport when traveling outside the United States.
Whole Person Analysis  “The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period
of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security
clearance.” AG ¶ 2(a). “Each security clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense
determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent
criteria and adjudication policy.” Directive ¶ 6.3. “Available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” AG
9
¶ 2(a). In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process factors listed in the
AG ¶ 2(a).
Of the nine adjudicative process factors which are used in the “whole person” analysis, only
the eighth one, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” is the most relevant.
In addition to that factor, other “available, reliable information about the person, past and present
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” (Adjudicative
Process, ¶2.a)
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance.
Applicant is a mature person with two college degrees in a technical profession.  He has lived in the
United States for nine years, and is part of his family’s tradition and practice of coming to America
to study, be educated, marry, get a good job, and become a U.S. citizen.  His three brothers in the
United States fulfilled those goals, and Applicant has done the same.  He received very favorable
comments from his co-workers and superiors about his work product and work ethic.  There is no
statement he submitted that opposes his security clearance application or produced any derogatory
information about him.  His ties to the  United States are stronger than his ties to any Middle Eastern
country, more particularly shown by his making only one voluntary trip with a niece and nephew to
Jordan in nine years.  His brothers do not travel back there on a regular basis, either.  These four
brothers are focused on the United States and their future here.  Applicant is part of that process and
effort.  His parents spend nearly half of each year in the United States.  His Jordanian passport is held
by his employer’s security officer and expires in less than one year.  He expressed a willingness to
renounce his Jordanian citizenship.
Some circumstances weigh against Applicant in the “whole person” analysis.  Jordan has a
significant risk of terrorist activity, as does Saudi Arabia where one of Applicant’s sisters lives.  He
has a brother in Kuwait.  Terrorists may attempt to use his family members to obtain classified
information.  But Applicant has not disclosed the nature of his work to his family, and the Jordanian
government has an interest in protecting Applicant because he is helping it pursuant to the contract
between his employer and that government.  Applicant was born in Kuwait, and spent his formative
years in the Middle East.  Lastly, he has frequent contact with his parents, who also helped pay for
his education in the United States.  The closer the connection to a relative in a foreign country, the
greater the risk that pressure might result in a compromise of national security.
After weighing all these factors, the facts, and the DC and MC under these guidelines, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign
influence.  I also conclude the “whole person” analysis for Applicant.  The evidence leaves me with
no doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
10
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2.  Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a to 2.e: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is
granted.
Philip S. Howe
Administrative Judge
