KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: The government’s evidence failed to establish that Applicant was at heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his limited family
connections to Lebanon. Clearance granted.
CASENO: 06-24844.h1
DATE: 10/03/2007
DATE:  October 3, 2007
In Re:
--------------
SSN: -------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24844
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
The government’s evidence failed to establish that Applicant was at heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his limited family
connections to Lebanon. Clearance granted.
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, dated  21
January 1992—as amended and modified, most recently in August 2006 (Directive).
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant challenges the 22 February 2007 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Statement of Reasons (SOR) recommending denial or revocation of his clearance because
of unresolved foreign influence concerns.  He answered the SOR 14 March 2007. DOHA assigned1
the case to me 29 June 2007 and I convened a hearing 1 August 2007. DOHA received the transcript
(Tr.) 15 August 2007.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. Accordingly, I incorporate those admissions
as findings of fact. He is a 45-year-old senior systems engineer for a defense contractor since
December 2004, and seeks access to classified information. During the pendency of this clearance
application, he held an interim secret clearance without incident from December 2004 until
December 2006.
Applicant was born in Lebanon in February 1962. He immigrated to the U.S. in 1985.  He
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 1987, and obtained his U.S. passport a few days later.
Applicant met his wife while attending graduate school in 1987. She is a native-born U.S.
citizen. They have four children, all native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant’s wife and children lived
in Lebanon from September 1997 to March 2000 so that Applicant could come visit them on
weekends.  At the time, Applicant worked for a software vendor who had assigned him to clients
in Saudi Arabia and Holland. Applicant’s travel to Lebanon from 1997 to 2000 was related to his
family visits; his trip to Lebanon in 2002 was business related. Applicant and his wife own their
home in the U.S., and have substantial sums in retirement and cash accounts in the U.S. They have
no financial interests in Lebanon.
Applicant’s parents are long divorced. His father is a resident citizen of Lebanon who retired
as a police officer in the early 1970s. He lives in an assisted living facility. Applicant has had no
contact with him since 2002. Applicant’s mother is also a citizen of Lebanon, but she resides with
Applicant because she has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. She is a retired teacher with
a lump sum pension.
Applicant’s brothers, sisters, and half-brother are resident citizens of Lebanon. Applicant’s
half brother is an automobile salesman, and Applicant cannot remember the last time he had contact
with him. One brother works as a contract payroll administrator for the Lebanese Finance Ministry.
His wife manages a mini-market that they own. Applicant’s other brother retired three years ago as
a colonel in the Lebanese Army, receiving a lump-sum pension. One of Applicant’s sisters is a
housewife, married to an architect. His other sister is a teacher, married to a retired Lebanese Army
brigadier general.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
3
Lebanon is a nominal democracy with a less-than-perfect human rights record. It has both
a long history of civil war and of foreign influence by Syria. Lebanon is not a state sponsor of
terrorism, but is a permissive environment for groups recognized by the U.S. as terrorist
organizations, considered by Lebanon as “freedom fighters” against Israel. The U.S. State
Department continues to maintain a travel warning for U.S. citizens contemplating travel to
Lebanon.
Applicant’s supervisor, coworker, and facility security officer attested to Applicant work
ethic and trustworthiness. In addition, he has never had a security violation.
POLICIES AND BURDENS
The Directive, Enclosure 2 lists adjudicative guidelines to be considered in evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative Judges must assess both
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each adjudicative issue fairly raised by the facts and
circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial common sense
consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3. of the Directive. The presence or absence of a
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or against Applicant. However,
specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them,
as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.
Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guideline is Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government must prove, by something
less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it
establishes a prima facie case against access to classified information. Applicant must then refute,
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the
Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with the
government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in
ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness of those
who must protect national interests as their own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.2
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and interests may
raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 2) may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way
contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).4
4
influence adjudications can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country
is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information requires3
careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target protected
information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that information, and the
individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive. More specifically, an
individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign entities or persons) raise
security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened risk or foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.4
In this case, the government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guideline
B. Considering first the country involved, Lebanon and the U.S. enjoy good foreign relations. It has
not been demonstrated that the Lebanese government is actively engaged in the collection of U.S.
intelligence such that would make Applicant or his family likely targets for coercion, duress, or
influence. The government’s evidence explains the links to terrorism that are on-going in Lebanon
and the way that those terrorist organizations operate, the increase in terrorism, and the increase in
membership in terrorist groups. Several of the groups that are frequently in the news, for example
Hizballah and Hamas, operate in Lebanon and practice terrorist acts against Israelis and against U.S.
citizens as well as indiscriminate violence in order to draw attention to themselves and increase their
membership and their power. There is no indication they use terrorism to gain access to U.S.
information.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence that there was
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because
of Applicant’s limited family contacts in Lebanon. None of Applicant’s family members have an
direct connection to the Lebanese government, and there is nothing in the past connections of his
father, his brother, or his brother-in-law to raise a concern over protecting classified information.
Further, Applicant has been in the U.S. more than 22 years. His wife and children are here All his
financial interests are here. His contacts with family members range in Lebanon range from nearly
non-existent to casual, but there is nothing in the circumstances of their being in Lebanon, or in
Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten the risk that he could be impelled or compelled to
provide protected information to Lebanon. Under these circumstances, I conclude that it is unlikely
Applicant can be pressured based on his family members in Lebanon. Accordingly, I resolve
Guideline B for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
   Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
5
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
Subparagraph g: For Applicant
Subparagraph h: For Applicant
Subparagraph i: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance granted.
 
John G. Metz, Jr.
Administrative Judge
