DATE:  October 29, 2007
In re:
-------------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-26251
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROBERT J. TUIDER
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Yelena Teterina, Personal Representative
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 58-year-old married man who with his wife and three children left Russia for
a better life in the U.S. in 1997.  He and his entire family became U.S. citizens.  Applicant was not
subject to foreign influence or preference, notwithstanding his ties to Russia through two of his
wife’s relatives and a childhood friend living there.  Applicant’s commitment and ties to the U.S.
are so substantial that he can be expected to resist and report any potential foreign influence or
preference concerns.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
GE 1 (Electronic Standard Form (SF) 86, Security Clearance Application is dated September 14, 2005, on the1
first page, and subsequent signature release page).
Applicant’s response to SOR was received at DOHA on April 9, 2007.  2
2
On September 14, 2005, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a Security
Clearance Application (SF 86).   On March 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals1
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified.  On May
1, 2007, Department Counsel filed a Motion to Amend the Statement of Reasons adding additional
allegations under Guideline B, Paragraph 2.
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference), and Guideline
B (Foreign Influence).  The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
In an answer notarized on April 6, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and
asked for a hearing.   Applicant responded to the Motion to Amend the Statement of Reasons on2
June 11, 2007.  The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2007.  On May 21, 2007, DOHA issued a
notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing on June 26, 2007.  The hearing was conducted as
scheduled.  The government submitted three documentary exhibits that were admitted as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 without objection.  I took administrative notice of nine
additional documents offered by the government as discussed, infra.  The Applicant testified and
submitted four documents that were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D without
objection.  Applicant submitted additional documents post-hearing that were collectively marked as
AE E and admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript on July 6, 2007.
PROCEDURAL RULINGS
Department Counsel moved to amend the Statement of Reasons and noted Applicant had
already answered his Motion to Amend the Statement of Reasons.  Without objection, I granted the
motion.  Tr. 10-12.
Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of the facts in Exhibit (Exs.) I through
IX.  Without objection, I took administrative notice of the Exs. I through IX.  Tr. 17-19.
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004));
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most
3
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well
known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). I took administrative notice of various
facts derived from Exs. I through IX and discussed infra.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted with explanation the allegations contained in the original SOR ¶¶ 1.a.
through 1.d. and 2.a. and 2.b.  As to the amended SOR, Applicant admitted with explanation the
allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 2.c. through 2.f. except for SOR ¶ 2.e.  As to ¶ 2.e., he noted that
the person alleged as his cousin is not his cousin, but rather his wife’s cousin.  His admissions are
incorporated herein as findings of fact, and his clarifying remarks about security concerns will be
discussed in further detail, infra.
I took into account Applicant’s native language is Russian. Applicant’s Personal
Representative also served as a translator when it was helpful or necessary.
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior database/applications development specialist employed by
a defense contractor since March 2004.  He has not previously held a clearance. He testified during
the hearing, and I found his testimony to be credible.
Applicant was born in 1948 in Moscow, Russia, then part of the United Soviet Socialist
Republics (USSR).  He grew up in Russia and completed his education there, served two years of
compulsory military service in the USSR Army from 1971 to 1973 and later obtained a master’s
degree in physics from a prestigious Russian university in June 1976. After college, he worked as
an engineer. He is eligible to receive a pension of approximately $100 a month from the Russian
government in approximately a year and a half.  However, because of the small amount of money
involved and the bureaucracy involved in collecting such a pension, he does not intend to apply for
it.  Tr. 33.
Applicant’s wife, like him, was born, raised and educated in Russia.  They married in
Moscow in October 1981 and have three children, a 25-year-old daughter, and two twin sons, who
are 23 years old.  Applicant’s three children were all born in Russia.  Fulfilling a life-long dream,
Applicant and his family immigrated to the U.S. in February 1997. GE 1, Tr. 40. Applicant became
a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2003, and received his U.S. passport in June 2004.  Applicant’s
wife and three children are all naturalized U.S. citizens. GE 1, Tr. 46. At the time Applicant and his
family moved to the U.S., his daughter was 14 years old and his twin sons were 13 years old.  His
children are all university graduates and are gainfully employed in promising careers.  One of his
sons is employed by a government contractor as a programmer and is currently undergoing a
background investigation for a security clearance.
Among the concerns alleged in the SOR were that Applicant and his wife exercised dual
citizenship with Russia and the U.S., that one of his children is a citizen of Russia and resides with
him in the U.S., that he held a Russian passport with an expiration date of December 14, 2006, that
he used his Russian passport in lieu of his U.S. passport in July 2004 and April 2006, and that he
intended to renew his Russian passport.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d., 2.a. and 2.c.)  None of
4
Applicant’s immediate family members residing in the U.S. to include his wife and three children
have valid Russian passports.  Tr. 40.
In addition to expressing a willingness to renounce his Russian citizenship, Applicant has
undertaken the formal process to renounce his Russian citizenship. This is a lengthy process which
includes submission of numerous documents and a $400.00 processing fee.  Tr. 50-51, AE E.
Applicant also submitted excerpts from the Russian Embassy website that stated he was required to
have a valid Russian passport in order to renounce his Russian citizenship and that as a dual citizen,
he was required to use his Russian passport to travel to and from Russia.  AE E.  It was this guidance
that prompted him to use his Russian passport in July 2004 and April 2006 after receiving his U.S.
passport, and previously state that he intended to renew his Russian passport.  
His Russian passport expired on December 14, 2006.  He submitted a copy of his expired
Russian passport with his application to renounce his Russian citizenship, and at present does not
intend or desire to renew his Russian passport.  Tr. 36-37, AE E.  Until he began the process of
applying for a security clearance, he was unaware of the prohibition against holding a U.S. passport
and a foreign passport.  Being aware of the requirements, he has no desire to renew or hold a Russian
passport, and desires to comply with DoD security clearance guidelines.  Tr. 43-44.
Applicant traveled to Russia in 1999, 2000, 2004, and 2006, and as previously noted used
his Russian passport during the later two visits.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., and 2.b.)  In 1999, he traveled to
Russia to see his mother after she experienced two strokes that left her paralyzed.  In 2000, he
traveled to Russia to attend his mother’s funeral.  In 2004, he traveled to Russia to attend his father’s
funeral.  In 2006, he traveled to Russia to make arrangements to sell his late father’s apartment.
Following the death of his father, he has no immediate relatives in Russia.  
Applicant adamantly stated he has no intention of ever returning to Russia stating, “I live[d]
for 25 years to leave Russia. For what I will come back (sic)?”  Tr. 40, 57.  Applicant’s wife is
employed by a U.S. government agency and “passed a thorough background investigation as part of
her employment requirement.  As part of her job duties, she regularly deals with Sensitive but
Unclassified (SBU) . . . data.”  AE E.  She first worked for this U.S. government agency as a sub-
contractor in November 2002 until she was hired on as a full-time employee in October 2005.  AE
E.
Additional concerns raised under Guideline B were Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of the
U.S. and Russia, his brother-in-law is a resident citizen of Russia, his cousin is a resident citizen of
Russia, and his best friend is a resident citizen of Russia. (SOR ¶¶ 2.c. though 2.f.)  As previously
noted, Applicant’s wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen and works for a government agency that
conducted a background investigation on her that resulted in her being granted access to sensitive
information.  Her Russian citizenship is based on her birth in Russia.  Applicant’s brother-in-law is
a 51-year-old bank programmer.  Contrary what was alleged, he does not have a resident citizen
cousin in Russia.  Rather the person identified in the SOR is his wife’s 70-year-old cousin.  His
wife’s cousin is a widow and works as an assembly line worker in an optical factory that makes
cameras.  His “best friend” is a childhood friend who is 59 years old and works in a library doing
maintenance work such as minor plumbing, electrical and furniture repairs.  Applicant telephones
his friend “about one time a month.”  Tr. 39.
5
Applicant has no financial or other interests in Russia, no connection to the Russian
government, no contacts with Russian citizens other than limited contact with his wife’s brother and
cousin, and monthly contact with his childhood friend.  His financial interests, his personal interests,
and his emotional commitments are all in the U.S.  Applicant knows to report to proper authority any
efforts to coerce classified information from him.   All of his real and personal property is in the
U.S., which includes a home and automobiles.  Applicant conducts all his banking in the U.S.  He
exercises his right to vote in the U.S. and enjoys all other privileges of being a U.S. citizen.  
Applicant provided one work-related reference letter from his company vice president, who
described Applicant’s performance in a very positive light.  In particular, he stated Applicant is
“open and honest in his dealings with individuals, his co-workers and the company.”  He further
opined Applicant could make a greater contribution if given a security clearance and did not question
Applicant’s dedication to the U.S., “and his desire to fulfill the American dream, exercise the
freedoms and liberties we enjoy, and contribute to the well being of our nation.”  AE A.
Russia has an active, recent, and ongoing collecting program targeting the U.S. and has been
the target of terrorist activity in recent years.  Russia imposes rigid visa requirements on foreign
travelers entering, and traveling within their country.  Russia is a nominal democracy with a mixed
human rights record.  However, the U.S. and Russia cooperate over a broad spectrum of foreign
policy issues, particularly counter-terrorism efforts.  Exs. I through IX.
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into
disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC), which are used to determine an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process provision in Section E2.2, Enclosure
2, of the Directive.  An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and
common sense decision.  Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a meaningful decision.
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a3
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006)
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v.Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
?The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable,4
[evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and [decides]
whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App.
Bd. July 6, 2006). 6
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to the relevant adjudicative guidelines are set forth
and discussed in the Conclusions section below.  Since the protection of the national security is the
paramount consideration, the final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that
the issuance of the clearance is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” In reaching
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”   The3
government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a potentially disqualifying
condition under the Directive. Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15 provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable clearance decision.”  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition  never shifts to the
government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).4
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a relationship that transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is because of this special relationship the
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to
whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty,
and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings.  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically
provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  Security clearance
decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism.
Nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or
in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.
7
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, I conclude the following
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR:
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
Under Guideline C, a security concern may exist when an individual acts in such a way as
to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Directive ¶ 9.
Applicable is Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) 10(a) exercise of any
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . .  .  Applicant’s
Russian passport expired in December 2006.  He used his Russian passport after obtaining his U.S.
passport in 2003 and 2004 when he traveled to Russia to attend his father’s funeral and sell his
father’s apartment.  Per information submitted by Applicant and not challenged by Department
Counsel, Applicant was required under Russian law to use his Russian passport to enter Russia
because he held dual citizenship.  
Under Russian law, Applicant’s Russian citizenship did not expire when he became a U.S.
citizen.  Rather, Applicant must undergo a lengthy and costly process to renounce his Russian
citizenship.  Applicant’s use of his Russian passport occurred before he applied for a security
clearance and before he became aware of DoD restrictions on the use of foreign passports.  Inasmuch
as Applicant has no immediate family in Russia and no property or other interests in Russia and
whose life is fully vested in the U.S., he has no intent to ever return to Russia.  As noted, Applicant
has taken the additional step of formally renouncing his Russian citizenship.
In light of the above, Applicant is able to invoke Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition
(FP MC) 11(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country;
MC 11(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and MC 11(e)
the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated.  As noted by Department Counsel in his closing argument, “. . . it appears that . . . for
Guideline C, there’s an argument to be made that Applicant has mitigated the prima facie concerns
of the government.”  Tr. 59.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Under Guideline B, foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Directive ¶ 6.
Contacts with citizens of other countries, or financial interests in other countries, are also
relevant if they make an individual potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure.
Common sense suggests that the stronger the ties of affection or obligation, the more vulnerable a
8
person is to being manipulated if the relative is brought under control or used as a hostage by a
foreign intelligence or security service.
The government established a potential case under this Guideline by demonstrating that
Applicant’s two sons are citizens of Russia and reside with him, that his wife is a dual citizen of
Russia and the U.S., that his brother-in-law is a resident citizen of Russia, and his childhood friend
is a resident citizen of Russia.  It was also established that Applicant traveled to Russia in 1999,
2000, 2004, and 2006.  The SOR alleged Applicant had a cousin, who was a resident citizen of
Russia, but this allegation was determined to be incorrect as the cousin referred to was his wife’s
cousin rather than his cousin.  
These facts trigger application of Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC) 7(a)
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person
who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; FI DC 7(b) connections to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and FI DC 7(d) sharing
living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates
a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Applicant, his wife and three children immigrated to the U.S. in February 1997 where they
have remained for the last ten years.  At the time Applicant moved here, his children were teenagers.
All three children have since completed their education to include graduating from university and
are all embarked on successful careers.  All four family members are naturalized U.S. citizens.  With
the passing of his father in 2004, Applicant has no living immediate family members remaining in
Russia.  Applicant’s previous travel to Russia was prompted by the illness or deaths of his parents,
and need to sell his father’s apartment after he died.  Hence there is no longer a requirement for
Applicant to travel to Russia.  
The closest connection Applicant has with a Russian resident citizen is his childhood friend.
He does maintain limited contact with two Russian resident citizen relatives who are relatives of his
wife.  The Russian passports of Applicant, his wife and three children have expired and are no longer
valid.  Applicant is a highly respected employee, who is making a significant contribution to his
company.  Applicant’s wife has undergone a background investigation in conjunction with her
employment at a U.S. government agency and has been granted access to sensitive information.  In
short, Applicant’s life is fully vested in the U.S.
The facts presented in this case warrant application of Foreign Influence Mitigating
Conditions (FI MC):  8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that
it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of
a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and FI MC
8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to
the foreign person, group, government or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 ISCR Case No. 02-30864 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-11448 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10,5
2004); ISCR Case No. 02-09389 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2004); ISCR Case No. 02-32006 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2004).
ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec.6
11, 2003)).
See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the eighth APF7
apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006)
(sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of
clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in
foreign influence cases).  9
“Whole Person” Analysis 
In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as discussed
previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to the whole person concept
under Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that a Judge may find in favor of
an applicant where no specific mitigating conditions apply.   Moreover, “[u]nder the whole person5
concept, the administrative judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life
separately, in a piecemeal manner.  Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s security eligibility
by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances.”   The directive lists nine6
adjudicative process factors (APF) which are used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign
influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior
changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,”
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.  In addition to the7
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.    
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s
personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the
facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  In that same decision,
the Appeal Board commended the whole person analysis in ISCR Case No. 03-02878 at 3 (App. Bd.
June 7, 2006), which provides:
Applicant has been in the U.S for twenty years and a naturalized citizen for seven.
Her husband is also a naturalized citizen, and her children are U.S. citizens by birth.
Her ties to these family members are stronger than her ties to family members in
Taiwan.  She has significant financial interests in the U.S. , and none in Taiwan.  She
testified credibly that she takes her loyalty to the U.S. very seriously and would
defend the interests of the U.S.  Her supervisors and co-worker assess her as very
loyal and trustworthy.  
Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First and more
importantly, Russia has an active, recent, and ongoing collection program targeting the U.S.  Second,
Applicant has connections to Russia through his wife’s relatives and his childhood friend.  Third,
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).8 10
Applicant is eligible for a nominal pension from the Russian government.  There is no evidence in
the record to suggest Applicant or his wife provide any support to anyone in Russia.
There are many other countervailing, positive attributes to Applicant’s life as a U.S. citizen
that weigh towards granting his clearance.  His Russian passport is expired.  He has strong links or
connections to the United States: (1) Applicant, his wife, and three children are all naturalized U.S.
citizens and reside in the U.S., (2) Applicant’s three children immigrated to the U.S. when they were
teenagers and spent their formative years in the U.S., were educated in the U.S. to include
completing university degrees.  Each child resides in the U.S., is hard working, productive,
successful, and making positive contributions to society; (3) Applicant and his family have resided
in the U.S. for ten years, (4) Applicant’s wife works for a U.S. government agency where she holds
a responsible position and has successfully gone through a background investigation, (5) Applicant
holds a responsible position working for a defense contractor and is highly regarded by his employer,
(6) all of Applicant’s real and personal property are in the U.S. to include owning a home.  All his
financial connections are in the United States, (7) he exercises all rights of U.S. citizenship including
the right to vote, and (8) he credibly stated that she would never do anything to harm the U.S.
There is no reason to believe that he would take any action which could cause potential harm
to his U.S. family or to this country.  He is patriotic, loves the United States, and would not permit
Russia to exploit him.  He has close ties to the United States.  His closest family members are his
wife and three children.  They are U.S citizens and live with him or near him.  Because his wife and
children live in the United States, they are not vulnerable to coercion or exploitation by a foreign
power.  The realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress is low.  I base this
conclusion on his credible and sincere testimony, and I do not believe he would compromise national
security, or otherwise comply with any Russian threats or coercion.  Applicant has not been to Russia
since 2006 and that was to settle his late father’s affairs, and is unlikely to return to Russia.  His
company official describe him as very honest, loyal, and trustworthy.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances,
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated or overcome the security
concerns pertaining to foreign influence and foreign preference.  I have no doubts concerning
Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person
factors”  and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative8
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under Enclosure 2 of the Directive.  I conclude
Applicant is eligible for access to classified information.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:         
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.d.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
11
Subparagraph 2.a. - 2.f.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge
