FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The federal government need not wait for an applicant to mishandle classified
information before it can deny or revoke access to such material.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-23318.a1
DATE: 10/30/2007
DATE: October 30, 2007
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23318
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Michael C. Bruno, Esq.
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 4, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline E
2
(Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided on the written
record.  On May 24, 2007, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Administrative Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  
In this case, Applicant had a history of cocaine use, including while he held a security
clearance.  He purchased cocaine and on two occasions pled guilty to cocaine possession, a felony.
Following another arrest, for possession of a controlled substance, Applicant was not prosecuted.
Applicant was arrested four times for driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence and,
on one of those occasions, for driving with a suspended license.  Applicant provided only some of
the above information when he filled out security clearance applications in 1992 and 2005.   
 
Applicant admitted most of the allegations, and those admissions were sufficient to establish
the government’s case against him.  The burden of proof then shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the case against him.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  With regard to the falsification
allegations, Applicant explained that his omissions were due either to inadvertence or to his
misunderstanding of the questions.  In mitigation of the Guideline H concerns, Applicant stated that
he had completely stopped using cocaine and had changed his lifestyle for the better due to his
religious involvement.  He also pointed out that he has held a security clearance for 31 years,  been
a dutiful employee, and never compromised national security.  Applicant did not submit any
documentary exhibits or witness statements. 
With regard to Applicant’s work record, the federal government need not wait until an
applicant actually mishandles classified material before it can deny or revoke access to such material.
See Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).
An applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative
security implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  In this case,
Applicant admitted using cocaine while he held a security clearance. 
  
Applicant objects to the Judge’s statement, under each of the Guidelines, that there was no
credible evidence to support Applicant’s statement as it related to each of the Guidelines.
Applicant’s statement regarding his present drug-free lifestyle and his explanation of his failure to
provide certain information on his security clearance applications were relevant and material
evidence.  However, Applicant’s statement were not binding and conclusive on the Judge.  Rather,
the Judge had to consider Applicant’s statement  in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 99-0005 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2000).  In this case, Applicant elected to have his
case decided upon the written record—a circumstance which deprived the Judge of an opportunity
to question Applicant about her concerns and evaluate his credibility in the context of a hearing.  In
response to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), Applicant did not submit any
documentary evidence or witness statements, other than his own statement.  The Judge did not find
Applicant’s statement credible.  Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge
erred in concluding that the government’s security concerns had not been mitigated.   
3
Even if she had found some evidence of mitigation, that alone would not compel the Judge
to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable, or vice
versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.           
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
