KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge made no findings about the conditions in China, and does not adequately
address the security concerns raised by Applicant’s foreign relatives.    Favorable decision
remanded.
CASENO: 06-21622.a1
DATE: 10/15/2007
DATE: October 15, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-21622
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance. On October 18, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), pursuant to
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
2
requested a hearing.  On March 12, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross
granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel submitted a timely appeal
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of the pertinent mitigating conditions, as well as his whole person analysis, are arbitrary, capricious,
and contrary to law.  Finding error, we remand to the Judge.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings: Applicant emigrated from the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) in 1986 to pursue his education.  He became a U.S. citizen in 1998 and his
wife, also born in the PRC, became a U.S. citizen in 2004.  The couple has one daughter, born in the
U.S. 
Applicant’s brother and mother are U.S. citizens.  His father is still a citizen of the PRC but
resides with Applicant and is a permanent resident of the U.S.  Applicant’s parents-in-law are
citizens of the PRC who reside there.  They are retired, living on a pension from a non-government
company.  Applicant speaks with them once or twice a year.
Applicant has traveled four times to China, all for vacations.  He has complied with his
employer’s reporting requirements for foreign travel.
Although Department Counsel has not explicitly challenged the Judge’s findings, we
conclude that such a challenge is implicit in Counsel’s argument that the Judge did not properly
analyze Applicant’s case in light of the political conditions within the PRC.  Insofar as the Judge
made no findings at all about such conditions, his analysis erred in that he does not adequately
address the security concerns raised by an Applicant’s foreign relatives.  See Directive ¶ E2.6.
(“Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact . . . is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or
is associated with a risk of terrorism.”) 
We conclude that the best way to resolve this case is to remand it to the Judge for more
complete factual findings and for analysis consistent with those findings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-00939 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2007). 
3
ORDER
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a security clearance is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple            
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
