 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        DATE:  October 31, 2007 
 
 
  
 ) 
In re: )  
 ) 
 -------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 06-21167 
 SSN: ----------- )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE 
SHARI DAM 
 
 
APPEARANCES 
 
FOR GOVERNMENT 
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
FOR APPLICANT 
Pro Se 
 
SYNOPSIS 
 
Applicant was born and educated in Iraq, and later moved to Kuwait. In 
1991, he and his immediate family immigrated to the United States to escape 
persecution from Saddam Hussein who invaded Kuwait. They became U.S. 
citizens in 2003, the same year he began his current position with a federal 
contractor. From 2006 to 2007, he worked in Iraq as a translator and civil 
engineer for the U.S. Army. Two siblings live in Iraq where they are under 
constant threat of persecution because of their religion. He paid or resolved the 
delinquent debts alleged in the Statement of Reasons. He mitigated security 
concerns pertaining to financial considerations, but not those pertaining to 
foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
On January 10, 2006, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86). 1 On March 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,2 pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and revised.3 The SOR 
alleges security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and F 
(Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
In an answer notarized on May 28, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have his case decided without a hearing.4 However, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing. On June 29, 2007, the case was 
assigned to another administrative judge, and reassigned to me on August 23, 
2007. On August 24, 2007, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, scheduling the 
hearing for September 11, 2007. At the hearing, Department Counsel introduced 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant introduced 
Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through J into evidence. At the conclusion of the 
hearing, I left the record open until September 21, 2007, to give Applicant time 
to submit additional documents. On September 18, 2007, Applicant submitted 
two exhibits that I marked as AX K and L. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 20, 2007. On September 28, 2007, Applicant 
submitted three additional exhibits that I marked as AX M, N and O. 
Department Counsel did not object to any of the submissions.  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 GX 1 (Electronic Standard Form (SF) 86, Security Clearance Application).  
 
2 Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated March 30, 2007, is the source for the facts in the 
remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 On August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987, as 
amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. Applicant’s case is 
resolved under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR, notarized on May 28, 2007, received at DOHA on 
June 6, 2007. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
3
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of the facts in GX 
7.5 Department Counsel also provided supporting documents to show the basis 
for the facts in GX 7.  (GX I to IV and VI to XI—listed in GX 7). Applicant had 
no objection to the introduction of the documents. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used 
for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to 
notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). I took administrative notice of various facts 
derived from GX 7 as indicated under subheading “Iraq” of this decision. 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT  
 
Applicant admitted the underlying facts in the SOR with clarification of 
certain facts. 6 His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
   
Applicant is 65 years old. 7 He was born in Iraq and attended college 
there. In 1971, he received a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering. He 
married an Iraqi woman in 1972. They have four children, all of whom were 
born in Iraq. In 1983, he moved to Kuwait because Saddam Hussein came into 
power and began persecuting Christians. After Iraq invaded Kuwait, Applicant 
lost his job and moved his family to the United States in 1991. (Tr. 30). He, 
along with his wife and four children, became U.S. citizens in December 2003.  
 
After arriving in the United States in 1991, Applicant started a printing 
company. He was unable to support his family with the business and decided to 
look for a job. In 1996, he began working as a construction superintendent and 
earning about $40,000 annually. That salary was insufficient to adequately 
support a family of six, some of whom were attending college. He worked in 
                                                          
5 I marked the pleading “Administrative Notice” as GX 7, post hearing for purposes 
of clarity.  
 
6 Response, supra  n. 4. 
 
7 GX. 1, supra n. 1, is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless otherwise 
stated.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
4
the construction field for the next several years, during which time he 
experienced periods of unemployment. In 2003, he obtained his current position 
with a federal contractor. From February 2006 until June 2007, he worked as a 
bilingual/bicultural advisor and engineering consultant to the U.S. Army in the 
Green Zone in Iraq. (Tr. 37; 57). He held an interim top secret clearance while 
there. Before assuming that position, he had not returned to Iraq since leaving 
in 1991. 
 
Applicant’s parents, now deceased, were resident citizens of Iraq. They 
had four daughters and one son. One of his sisters is deceased. One of his 
sisters lives in Australia. Two sisters remain citizen residents of Iraq and are 
married to Iraqi citizens with whom they have children. One of those sisters is 
currently visiting her son and family in the United States. He has visited his 
sister weekly since she arrived in the United States. Otherwise, he normally 
speaks to his sisters and family members about six to seven times a year, 
around the holidays. (Tr. 60-61). He did not see any of his relatives while he 
was stationed in Iraq from 2006 to 2007. None of his Iraqi family knows where 
he works or what type of work he does. (Tr. 62). All of his family members are 
Christians and subject to persecution by the radical Islamic factions in Iraq. 
(Tr. 66). One of his brother-in-laws recently left his home because of the threat 
of violence. (Tr. 63). Both of Applicant’s wife’s parents are deceased. They 
were Iraqi citizens. (GX 1 at 5). 
 
Applicant submitted four exhibits attesting to his capabilities and 
contribution to the U.S. Armed Forces’ efforts in rebuilding Iraq. In May 2006, 
a major in the U.S. Army wrote that Applicant “is continually trying to make 
Iraq a better and safer place. He is a critical asset to the success of the Iraq 
mission and has performed in an outstanding manner whenever called on.” (AX 
G). Another major wrote that Applicant was an invaluable member of the 
project, who enhanced the battalion’s abilities in working on a site project. (AX 
H). In a May 2007 evaluation, his commander rated him as exceeding all 
requirements and referred to his work as “exceptional.” (AX I). Applicant 
received a commendation from the captain of his team for outstanding work 
during his assistance to the Coalition Forces from April 2006 to April 2007. 
(AX F).   
 
Applicant’s name is on the title to one of his sisters’ home in Iraq. She 
and her family live there, but she was unable to legally purchase it because of a 
residency law implemented by Saddam Hussein. Applicant does not believe he 
would ever inherit it or receive any money in the event it was sold. He hopes 
his sister will be able to take sole title of it under the new Iraqi government. He 
has never visited the home. (Tr. 36; GX 3 at 5).  
 
Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride at being a U.S. citizen 
at his hearing and in his response to the SOR. “I am now a US Citizen. I am 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
5
willing to renounce the Iraqi Citizenship. I am very proud to be a US Citizen.” 
(GX 2 at 6).  
 
In addition to raising security concerns regarding foreign influence, the 
Government alleged in Paragraph 2 (¶¶ 2. a through 2.g) of the SOR that 
Applicant owed seven delinquent debts, totaling $20,662. According to credit 
reports, the debts began accruing in 2002 and spanned into January 2006. (GX 
4, 5 and 6). Applicant admitted that the debts were his, but asserted some of 
them were paid. The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ Debt Status 
2.a $542 Paid 5/2007 – AX O; Tr. 40 
2.b $1,297 Paid 4/2007 – AX C & D; Tr. 41-42 
2.c $2,282 Paid 4/2007 – AX C & D 
2.d $11,201 Paid 8/2007 – AX A & B8  
2.e $2,320 (same as 2.g) Negotiated settlement in July 
2006–AX E; Tr. 46-47 status 
unknown  
2.f $1,729 Paying monthly – AX N:9  Tr. 47 
2.g $2,320 (same as 2.e) AX E10 
 
Some of Applicant’s delinquent debt arose during the years while he was 
either unemployed or under-employed and did not have sufficient income to 
manage his bills. He believes other debts may have become due while he was 
recently out of state or in Iraq and his wife did not pay them promptly. (Tr. 83-
38). He paid four of the above debts. Two of the remaining debts are duplicates 
for which he documented a previously proposed settlement offer. He is paying 
the medical debt at $200 per month per his repayment plan.  
 
In his current position, Applicant earns $164,000 annually, leaving him 
approximately $8,000 net per month, which is enough money to support his 
family and pay his bills. He has been on leave from his position for the past two 
months, taking some time off for personal reasons. He intended to return to 
work in October 2007. (Tr. 68-70). Although he has never worked with 
classified information, his employer would like him to obtain a permanent 
security clearance. (Tr. 38). 
 
Iraq 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein 
from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s new government took office. 
                                                          
8 This debt is noted on GX 6 at 8. 
 
9 This is a medical bill for Applicant’s son that he initially disputed due to malpractice claims.  
 
10 See GX 6 at 9 for confirmation that these two allegations concern the same account. 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
6
Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains engulfed in violence, 
perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous attacks and 
kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors and other 
civilians, as well as Iraqis. Despite aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.     
 
 
POLICIES 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative 
judge must consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
For Access to Classified Information” (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into 
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are used 
to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. AG ¶ 2. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
common sense decision. Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny 
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept,” an 
administrative judge considers all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. AG ¶ 
2(c). 
 
 Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
(9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
  
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration, the final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the 
standard that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. 
Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or 
conjecture. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
7
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”11 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to 
establish a case, which demonstrates, in accordance with the Directive, that it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an 
applicant’s access to classified information. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant 
to present “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and 
[Applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating 
condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 12 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and 
confidence. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures 
throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited.  Executive 
Order 10865, § 7 states that “Any determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest, and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
  
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of 
all appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described 
                                                          
11 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept 
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is 
something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two 
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n , 383 U.S. 607, 620 
(1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See 
v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth ., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
12 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both 
favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of 
pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden 
of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 
2006).  
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
8
briefly above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth 
in the SOR: 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains that security concerns may arise from foreign contacts 
and interests “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial 
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under 
[AG B] can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk 
of terrorism.” 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion; and, 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if 
only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with 
that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 Applicant has consistent contacts with his two sisters, who are resident 
citizens of Iraq. His sisters and their families are Christian and encounter 
periodic persecution by Islamic extremists. This close relationship with the two 
families creates a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because terrorists in the Middle East seek intelligence and are hostile to United 
States’ interests.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
9
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these two 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence and prove mitigation. Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or 
activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply because Applicant’s relationships with 
his sisters are of sufficient magnitude to negate these two mitigating conditions. 
His contacts with family members in Iraq are consistent, and he has been 
routinely visiting his sister, who is in the United States. There is a risk that he 
could be placed in a position of having to choose between his sisters and the 
interests of the United States, given the nature and extent of religious 
persecution his family encounters in Iraq.  
 
Applicant established a limited application of AG ¶ 8(b). He has a sense 
of pride and loyalty to the United States. He has lived in the United States with 
his immediate family since 1991. They became U.S. citizens in 2003. He did 
not return to Iraq until 2006 when he worked for the U.S. Army. He has worked 
here for the past 16 years and educated his children in the United States. In 
contrast, his Iraqi interests have become more minimal over the years. Although 
his name is on the title to his sister’s property, he asserts no ownership nor has 
he visited it. His contacts with his two sisters in Iraq are primarily to discuss 
family issues several times a year.  While he was in Iraq from 2006 to 2007, he 
did not have any contact with his family. There is some likelihood that he can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
10
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the Government’s concern regarding financial 
problems: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
 
Two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions could raise a 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” AG ¶ 19(a) and (c). Applicant admitted that he had insufficient 
funds to meet his debts for a period of time. According to credit reports, he has 
a history of failing to meet those obligations up to 2006. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of these two 
disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence of 
mitigation. Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude all 
three mitigating conditions apply. Some of Applicant’s financial troubles arose 
during earlier periods of unemployment and under-employment. More recently, 
his wife failed to pay some of their bills. Both facts establish the first prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b). As there is no evidence regarding the financial steps he took to 
manage his debts during those times, the application of the mitigation condition 
is limited.  
 
 Applicant has paid four of the seven debts. He is on a payment plan for a 
medical bill he previously disputed, arising from his assertion of medical 
malpractice. He represented that he previously negotiated a settlement of 
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
11
another debt, although there is no evidence that he made a final payment on it. 
Because the adjudicative guidelines do not require one to have paid-off every 
debt in full, his good-faith efforts over the past few years, coupled with his 
current salary, are sufficient to establish that the matters are being resolved and 
under control, as required by AG ¶ 20 (c) and (d). 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 “Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must not 
consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life separately, in a piecemeal 
manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s security eligibility by 
considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances.”13 The 
directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF), which are used for 
“whole person” analysis and are applicable to financial considerations. 
However, as foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” is the most relevant of 
the nine APFs to this adjudication. 14 In addition to the eighth APF, other 
“[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” AG ¶ 2(a). 
Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”       
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence 
of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s 
family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or 
her social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given 
case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
Considerable mitigating evidence weighs towards granting Applicant’s 
security clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He has lived in the United 
States for 16 years, and he has been a naturalized citizen for four years. 
Applicant’s spouse and children have been living in the United States for the 
same number of years and are naturalized citizens. He did not return to Iraq for 
15 years, until his job supporting U.S. forces took him back. While working 
there from 2006 to 2007, he did not contact any of his family members. There is 
no evidence he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting ISCR Case No. 02-
01093 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 
2007) (citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events 
may have a significance that is missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis 
under the eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR 
Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR 
Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because 
Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-
00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF is exclusive 
circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
Deleted: paid 
Deleted: es not
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
12
United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and he 
has worked diligently for a defense contractor for several years in an important 
capacity for the U.S. Army. His supervisors assess him as loyal, trustworthy, 
conscientious, and responsible. He is a good family member, employee and U.S. 
citizen. No witnesses recommended denial of his security clearance. There is 
not any derogatory criminal information about him in the record. His ties to the 
United States appear to be stronger than his ties to his sisters and their families 
in Iraq. He has taken steps to resolve his financial problems and is committed to 
managing his debts. 
 
 However, three circumstances weigh heavily against Applicant in the 
whole person analysis pertinent to Foreign Influence.  First, there is a 
significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly 
for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to the United States and actively 
seek classified information. Terrorists, or other forces operating in Iraq, may 
attempt to use his sisters or their families who live there to obtain such 
information. Second, he had significant connections to Iraq before he 
immigrated to the United States in 1991. He was born in Iraq and spent his 
formative years there. He obtained his education from an Iraqi university and 
worked there as a civil engineer for a period of time. Third, and most 
significant, his family is under the constant threat of religious persecution, as 
noted by his testimony that his brother-in-law recently was forced to leave his 
home.  
 
 “Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is 
raised . . . it is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling 
interest in security by denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990).  After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, all facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
financial considerations, but not those related to foreign influence. The 
evidence leaves me with some doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and 
suitability.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person 
factors”15 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under 
the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude that Applicant is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
        
   
 
                                                          
 
15See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
                                                                                                                                         
 
13
FORMAL FINDINGS 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
     Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.g:       For Applicant 
 
 
DECISION 
 
In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a 
security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
     SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge  
 
