DATE:  October 18, 2007
In Re:
-------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00944
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOAN CATON ANTHONY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s mother, father, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of the People’s
Republic of China (PRC).  From approximately 1980 to 1983, her father was employed in an official
capacity by the government of the PRC.  After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2001, Applicant traveled
to the PRC twice in 2002 and once in 2004.  Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under
Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and1
modified.
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program2
(Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified.
  
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security
clearance for Applicant.  On June 14, 2007, under the applicable Executive Order  and Department1
of Defense (DoD) Directive (Directive),  DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing the2
basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Adjudicative Guideline B (Foreign Influence),
promulgated December 29, 2005, and applicable in DoD adjudications of SORs issued as of
September 1, 2006, and thereafter.   With the SOR, DOHA provided Applicant with a copy of the3
Directive and the applicable Guidelines.  Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated, and it was
received by DoD on July 5, 2007.  In her answer, Applicant requested that her case be determined on
the record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on
August 23, 2007.  The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6.  By letter dated
August 27, 2007, a copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on
August 30, 2007.  She timely filed additional information within the required time period.  Department
Counsel did not object to the admission of Applicant’s additional filing.  On September 26, 2007, the
case was assigned to me for a decision.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under revised adjudicative
Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., Item 1.)  Applicant admitted all three
allegations.  (Item 4.)  Her admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. 
Applicant is 50 years old and employed by a defense contractor as a software engineer and web
developer.  She was born in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and became a U.S. citizen in 2001.
Applicant’s husband was also born in the PRC and became a U.S. citizen in 1999.  The couple was
married in the PRC in 1983.  In June 1999, Applicant earned a master’s degree from a U.S. university.
(Item 6; Applicant’s response to FORM.)  
Applicant was raised by her grandparents in the northeastern part of the PRC until she was 14
years old.  The record indicates she resided with her parents until finishing high school.  She attended
college in the PRC and visited her parents and family members during school vacations and on
holidays.  Seventeen years ago, when she was approximately 33 years old, she immigrated to the U.S.
from the PRC.  Applicant asserts she does not have a close relationship with her parents, who are
citizens and residents of the PRC.  She also asserts her two siblings, who are citizens and residents of
the PRC, work for private companies and have no relationships with the government of the PRC.
(Applicant’s response to FORM; Item 6.)
From approximately 1980 to 1983, Applicant’s father was employed as an official by the
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated August 2007 (Background Note on China) at 1-2,4
14-16, 17-22.)
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook  [Unclassified/For Official Use Only], dated5
June 2004, (Intelligence Threat Handbook), at 17.
U.S. - China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2006 Report to Congress of the U.S. - China6
Economic and Security Review Commission, dated November 2006, at 138.
3
government of the PRC.  He has been retired for approximately 25 years.  (Item 4; Item 5 at 3;
Applicant’s response to FORM.)
In 2002, Applicant traveled to the PRC to attend her grandmother’s funeral.  She traveled again
to the PRC in 2002 to visit her father, who had suffered a heart attack.  In 2004, she traveled to the
PRC for her father’s 80th birthday celebration.  Applicant telephones her family members in the PRC
approximately every one or two months.  (Applicant’s response to FORM; Item 5.) 
Applicant is highly respected by her employer, who rated her job performance from June 2005
to May 2006 as “Outstanding” in most categories.  (Applicant’s response to FORM.)
With the SOR, the Government provided seven official U.S. publications describing the
economic, political and intelligence activities of the PRC.  The Government also provided these
documents to Applicant and requested that the administrative judge admit the documents to the record
in this case and take administrative notice of specific facts within those documents. I have admitted
the proffered official documents to the record, and I take administrative notice of the following facts
found therein:
The PRC, which has a population of over one billion people, is ruled by an authoritarian
government dominated by the Chinese Communist Party.  The U.S. and the PRC disagree on the status
of Taiwan, and the PRC continues to resist what it considers to be superpower dominance by the
United States.4
The Intelligence Threat Handbook identifies PRC intelligence activities toward the United
States as follows: “The United States is a primary intelligence target of China because of the U.S. role
as a global superpower; its substantial military, political, and economic presence in the Pacific Rim
and Asia; its role as a developer of advanced technology that China requires for economic growth; and
the large number of Americans of Chinese ancestry, who are considered prime intelligence targets by
the PRC.”5
The U.S. - China Economic and Security Review Commission identified between 2,000 and
3,00 Chinese front companies operating in the United States to gather secret or proprietary
information.  Additionally, the PRC “often requests or requires its citizens who are studying or
working in places where they have access to cutting-edge research activities or to technology
development and application to obtain whatever information about those activities they can obtain and
provide the information to the Chinese government.”6
The Commission Report also made this key finding: “China makes a concerted effort to
modernize its military by obtaining military-related systems and technologies from other countries,
Id. at 139.7
DC 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other8
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”
 DC 7(b) reads: “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict9
of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”
4
particularly Russia.  China used legal and illegal means, including espionage, to obtain such
technologies from the United States.”7
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
The Foreign Influence Guideline identifies the following security concern: Foreign contacts
and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should  consider the identity of the foreign country in which
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
This case requires the recognition that the PRC is a totalitarian government that actively targets
U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry to request or require that they obtain information about cutting-edge
research activities or technology development and provide that information to the Chinese government.
Moreover, the Chinese government uses legal and illegal means, including espionage, to obtain
information on technology development from the United States.
Applicant admitted the three Guideline B allegations in the SOR.  The facts in this case raise
possible security concerns under three Guideline B disqualifying conditions.  Applicant has contacts
with four family members who are residents and citizens of the PRC, a country that is known to
exploit, pressure, or coerce U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry to provide secret or proprietary
information to the PRC government. Her father, now retired, held an official position with the PRC
government.  These facts raise concerns under Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a) of Guideline B.8
Applicant’s mother, father, sister and brother are citizens and residents of the PRC.  Because
the PRC is a totalitarian state with many political and security interests antithetical to the U.S., these
facts raise security concerns under DC 7(b) of Guideline B.    9
Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2001, Applicant traveled to the PRC three times: twice in
2002 and once in 2004.  Even though her travels to the PRC were for the purpose of visiting family
members, her presence in the PRC made her and her family members potentially vulnerable to
exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the PRC government, which actively seeks to obtain classified
DC 7(i) reads: “conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable10
to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign group, government, or country.”
5
or proprietary information from U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry who work for U.S. government
contractors.  These facts raise concerns under DC 7(i) of Guideline B.  10
There are several Mitigating Conditions (MC) that potentially apply to the disqualifying
conditions raised by the facts in this case.  Applicant could mitigate Guideline B security concerns if
she could credibly demonstrate that the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  MC
8(a).  She could also mitigate Guideline B security concerns if the facts credibly show there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person,
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest  (MC 8(b)); or contact or communication with foreign citizens is
so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence
or exploitation (MC 8(c)); or the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or
are approved by the cognizant security authority (MC 8(d)). 
Applicant’s foreign contacts with her family members in the PRC and her travel to the PRC
were not the result of U.S. government business, and nothing in the record suggests they were
approved by a cognizant security authority.  Applicant’s contacts with her parents and siblings in the
PRC are frequent, on-going, and familial.  Her relationship with them is one of loyalty and obligation,
raising the concern that these relationships create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
Applicant failed to rebut a potentially disqualifying security concern by providing credible evidence
that it is unlikely she would placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
government and the interests of the U.S.  She also failed to rebut the potentially disqualifying security
concern by providing credible evidence that she was not vulnerable to a conflict of interest because
of her sense of loyalty to her family members in the PRC was minimal and she could be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  Accordingly, I conclude that MCs 8(a),
8(b), 8(c), and 8(d) are inapplicable.
Whole Person Analysis
The adjudicative process, as defined at E2.2. of the Directive, is “the careful weighing of a
number of variables known as the whole person concept” and further requires the consideration of
reliable information, favorable and unfavorable, about a person’s past and present conduct.  The
following factors should be considered in evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct under
the whole person concept: “the nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; the frequency and recency of the
conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the voluntariness of participation;
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; the motivation for
the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.” (See Directive, E2.2.1.1. to E2.2.1.9.) 
6
Applicant is 50 years old and has resided in the U.S. for approximately 17 years.  In 1999, she
earned a master’s degree from a U.S. university.  She became a U.S. citizen in 2001.  The record is
silent regarding the nature and extent of Applicant’s education, work experience and social and
business contacts in the PRC from the time of her graduation from high school to her emigration at
the approximate age of 33 years.
Applicant is a valued employee of a U.S. government contractor.  She is also an honorable
family member who seeks to maintain contact with her parents and siblings who are citizens and
residents of the PRC.  In carrying out her family responsibilities, she has made choices to travel to the
PRC, and these choices could also make her vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure and could
cause the future compromise of classified information.  I have carefully reviewed the administrative
record, Applicant’s submissions, and the allegations in the SOR.  I have weighed the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions of Guideline B, and I have evaluated Applicant’s conduct in light of the whole
person concept identified at ¶ E2.2. of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.  After doing so, I conclude
allegations 1.a. through 1.c. of the SOR against Applicant.
Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR or in the
administrative record suggested she was not a loyal American citizen.  Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty,
and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings.  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically
provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  Therefore, nothing in this
decision should be construed to suggest I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express
or implied decision as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance
is denied.
Joan Caton Anthony
Administrative Judge
7
