DATE:  October 31, 2007
  
In re:
-----------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP  Case No. 07-01610
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHRISTOPHER GRAHAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Ray T.  Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 42-year-old project controller employed by a federal contractor.  He married
for the second time in 2000.  From the outset,  his wife had numerous judgments entered against her,
wrote several insufficient funds checks, and was totally irresponsible in handling their financial
affairs.  He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2001, which was dismissed in 2003, followed by his
filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and having his debts discharged in December 2003.  He thereafter
incurred over $30,000 in delinquent debts.  He commenced repayment of creditors one month prior
to the hearing.  He did not successfully mitigate the trustworthiness concerns about financial
considerations.   Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Government Exhibit 1 (Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P), dated August 3, 2006).1
Tr. at 6.2
Tr. at 14, 20.3
Id. at 16.4
2
On August 3, 2006, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P).   The1
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue his eligibility to
occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position designated ADP-I/II/III.  As required by
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20,
1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, DOHA issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 14, 2007, detailing the basis for its decision – security
concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Directive.  The President issued
revised adjudicative guidelines (Guidelines) on December 30, 2005.  DoD implemented them on
September 1, 2006.  Pending official amendment/reissue of DoD Directive 5220.6, the Guidelines
are to be used in all cases when the SOR is dated on or after September 1, 2006.  Because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, DoD policy requires that this case proceed under the revised
guidelines. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 5, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before
an administrative judge.  DOHA assigned the case to me on August 15, 2007, and issued a Notice
of Hearing on August 29, 2007.  I convened a hearing on September 14, 2007, to consider whether
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's  security clearance.
Applicant made a knowing and voluntary waiver of the rule requiring15-days  notice of the hearing,
because he had actual notice more than 15 days prior to the hearing.   The government offered ten2
exhibits, marked as Exhibits 1-10.  Applicant offered twelve exhibits, marked as Exhibits A-L.  All
exhibits were admitted without objection.  I kept the record open until September 24, 2007, to allow
Applicant the time to file additional documents.  He filed 26 documents that were marked as
Applicant’s Post-Trial Exhibits 1-26.  The government had no objection and the exhibits were
admitted.   DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 24, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR except for subparagraphs 1.c. and
1.i.  The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.  After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following
additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 42-year-old project controller employed by a federal contractor.   He was3
divorced in 1995, remarried in 2000, and separated in March 2005.  He has one child from his first
marriage who lives with him.  He has completed two years towards a college degree.   He served in4
the United States Navy for 20 years (1985-2005), retiring as a petty officer first class (E-6), and
Id. at 17-18.5
Id. at 20.6
Applicant’s Post-Trial Exhibit 22 (Chronological Account of Marriage, dated September 2007) at 1-6.7
Id. at 1. 8
Id. at 2.9
Id. at 3.10
3
received an honorable discharge.  He has a disability claim pending with the Veterans Administration
for a service-connected disability.   He has held a security clearance since November 1985.5 6
In August 2001, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The case was dismissed
in April 2003.  In September 2003, he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, and was discharged
from his debts in December 2003.  Since that time, he has accumulated $30,252 in delinquent debts.
Applicant’s chronological account of his marriage best details his continuing financial problems.7
Applicant met his second wife in May 2000.  In June 2000, they became engaged, and he
became a 50% partner in her cleaning company.  They were married August 26, 2000.  He wrote
several checks to cover wedding expenses, which she promised to pay but did not.  In September
2000, several judgments against his wife began to be attached to their bank accounts, freezing access
to available funds.  This occurred because she signed for many things of value for her former
boyfriend (boat, truck, and apartment), none of which he paid.  Also in September 2000, she received
a litigation settlement check of approximately $195,000.  Applicant was to receive $30,000, but it
was held in her account and the account was frozen.  In November, some of the company checks and
several of Applicant’s personal checks bounced.  The financial institution intercepted his paycheck
and canceled the checking account.  In December 2000, creditors were calling saying they did not
get paid, although his wife had told him she had paid them.  He questioned her, she apologized, but
became verbally abusive and argumentative.8
In January 2001, Applicant begin having concerns about marrying his wife and having her
ruin his credit.  In February 2001, she continued lying about paying creditors as he was receiving
phone calls from these creditors.  She stated she would order a check from the bank to cover all the
delinquent debt.  However, the check never appeared.  In April, more judgments against her were
attached to the bank accounts.  He asked to take over responsibilities for handling the household
expenses, and she refused.  In August 2001, he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in an effort
to keep his house and vehicle.  The judgments kept coming and he could not keep up with all of the
expenses that were made by his family of six.9
In May 2003, he lost his house to foreclosure.  The loan was VA guaranteed so he can never
obtain a VA loan again.  He conceded part of the financial issue was his fault, but placed most of the
blame on his wife’s mismanagement of funds, excessive judgments, deceptions, and refusal to let
him manage the money.  He also set up an allotment from his military pay for an apartment for the
family to live in.10
Id. at 3-4.11
Id. at 5-6.12
Id. at 6.13
4
In May 2004, his wife gave the apartment manager a bad check, the lease came to an end,
Applicant stopped his allotment, and he was taken to court by the landlord.  He was allowed to stay
for 30 days, pay a late fee, and the amount of her insufficient funds check.  During this time he and
his wife were attempting to purchase a house.  Every time it approached settlement, she would not
have a check from the bank, making up various lies and excuses.  This happened three times.  In July
2004, she applied to lease a two-bedroom apartment, using his military status to get the apartment.
She later told him that she rented the apartment so that her mother, two nieces, and two nephews
could live there since they were homeless.  She promised to pay all rent, and he trusted her again.
She and her mother and the grandchildren parted ways leaving her unemployed mother with no
means to pay rent.  In August 2004, they had to move out of the apartment by court order.  His wife
went to another state to obtain an apartment for her mother.  Even though his credit record was
ruined with foreclosure and litigation, he signed this new  lease, as he had no place else to go.  Later
that month, she found a two-bedroom condo and convinced the owner to rent to them.  She lived
there with their two older children who were high school seniors.  In September 2004, she allowed
her oldest son and a friend to sublease the unit where her mother was living, which was then in
Applicant’s name, so he would not be liable for breaking the lease.  They paid no rent, had other
people living with them, and trashed the apartment.  His wife passed another bad check.  In October
2004, she had a judgment against her for the bad check.  At another apartment complex, his check
had bounced and she had promised to get the money out of the bank but never did.  He was taken
to court, and because funds were frozen at the bank, they were forced to move out of another
apartment due to her alleged mishandling of the finances.  In December 2004, they were on the verge
of eviction from a fourth-place because she did not pay the rent, forcing Applicant to borrow money
from his friends.  They subsequently were evicted for nonpayment of rent.11
In February 2005, they moved to another condo, and his wife’s check for her portion of the
rent bounced.  (Eventually, they were evicted in August, 2005.)  In April 2005, he retired from the
Navy, and the only income was his retirement check.  After the eviction, they were homeless, and
they went to live in an apartment paying $179 per day.  Their vehicle was repossessed, and he had
to use a large portion of his retirement check to get the car back.  In October 2005, they moved to
a five bedroom townhouse.  The marriage was deteriorating, they tried counseling, but it was not
successful because the counselor told his wife that she should pay Applicant the money she owed
him.  In December 2005, she wrote Applicant a letter stating she wanted him to move out so she
could re-build her self-esteem.  He moved out in mid-December.  He notified the landlord that he
was moving and that his wife was the sole person responsible for rent.12
Throughout 2006, Applicant’s wife promised to give him money, saying she would pay all
the bills that were created during the marriage.  She felt responsible for him losing everything he had
worked for.  She claimed she had filed for divorce, but he found no case on file.  In December 2006,
she made several threats about never paying him anything and that she could care less what a court
might say.13
Id. at 33.14
Applicant’s Exhibit B, debt discharged in bankruptcy.15
Applicant’s Exhibit C, debt discharged in bankruptcy.16
Applicant’s Exhibit D (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-2.17
Applicant’s Exhibit E (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-3.18
Applicant’s Exhibit F (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-3; Applicant’s Post Trial Exhibit 5 (Letter from Collection19
Agency, dated September 18, 2007) at 1.
Applicant’s Exhibit G (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-5.20
Applicant’s Post Trial Exhibit 3 (Letter from Bank, dated September 12, 2007) at 1.21
Applicant’s Exhibit I (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-2.22
Applicant’s Exhibit J (Debt Action Tracking Sheet) at 1-2.23
5
Applicant claimed that his wife received over a million dollars in lawsuit settlements, that
he never received any money from her, and provided no proof of these settlements.   His debts listed14
in the SOR, and unpaid as of February 28, 2007, were as follows:
SOR ¶ AMOUNT STATUS
1.c. $779 paid 15
1.d. $152 paid 16
1.e. $518 paid 8/27/07 17
1.f. $7,972 payment plan on 9/11/07, 24 monthly @ $250/month 18
1.g. $6,393 payment plan on 9/12/07, 26 monthly @ $250/month 19
1.h. $9,786 payment plan on 9/11/07, 24 monthly @ $250/month 20
1.i. $584 removed from his credit report 21
1.j. $1,457 payment plan on 9/11/07, 4 monthly @ $364.16 22
1.k. $4,126 payment plan on 9/12/07, 16½ monthly @ $250/month 23
For the next three months his payments amount to $1,364.16.  After that time they are $1,000
a month for the next 15 ½ months, etc.  In computing the above, at the date of the hearing, giving
Applicant credit for the payments made, he still owed about $28, 370.
POLICIES
Guideline ¶ 2. 24
Guideline ¶ 2(c).25
Guideline ¶ 2(b).26
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion27
in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
6
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information”
(Guidelines).  In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which
are used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed
in the adjudicative process.  An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair,24
impartial and common sense decision.  Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge considers all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.25
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at Guideline ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5)
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   In26
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on
mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”   The27
Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a case which demonstrates,
in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.  Once the Government has produced
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to present “witnesses
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 28
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) “The Administrative Judge considers the record evidence29 .   
as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, evaluates Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of the
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant has met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶
E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).
Executive Order 10865, § 7.30
7
favorable clearance decision.”   The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the28
Government.29
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This relationship transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The Government reposes a high degree of trust and
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this
Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited.  Nothing in this Decision should
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.30
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline ¶ 18 articulates the Government’s concern concerning financial problems.  “Failure
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.” 
The government established its case under Guideline ¶ 19.  Two Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) raise trustworthiness concerns and are disqualifying in this case:
Guideline ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and Guideline ¶ 19(c) “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.”  Applicant has a history of not meeting debts, as set forth in the SOR
and government exhibits.
Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) under Guidelines ¶ 20(a)-(e)
are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
Directive ¶ E.2.2.1.31
8
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which
is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude Guidelines ¶ 20(a), (c),
and (e) do not apply.  The debts continued to be delinquent until the time of the hearing, he has not
sought financial counseling, and there is no basis to dispute most of the indebtedness.  However,
Guidelines ¶ 20 (b) and (d) are at issue.
Applicant blamed his wife for most of his financial problems.  His statements revealed a
history of judgments against his wife, numerous insufficient funds checks written by her, and
numerous situations where he had to make payments to salvage assets or find housing for his family.
He also claimed that his wife received over $1 million in lawsuit settlements.  This argument lacks
credibility.  I seriously doubt she ever received any such settlements.  If she had access to that
amount of money, it is inconceivable that she would have all of the various judgments entered
against her, or bounce numerous checks, and would have provided for her mother and other family
members if they were in need.  As early as 2001, he was questioning the wisdom of his marriage due
to his wife’s financial irresponsibility.  Yet for the next five years, he continued to live in financial
exigency.  This is not a pattern of events beyond his control.  He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and had
his debts discharged in December 2003.  Yet for another three years, he accumulated over $30,000
in delinquent debts.  Further, he only started making payment plans with his creditors a month or less
prior to the hearing.  This is not a good-faith effort at resolving indebtedness, because he just started.
He has established no track record to show that his efforts have been successful.  By allowing
himself to get in this financial situation, he has demonstrated poor judgment and a lack of
responsibility and trustworthiness.  I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable and I conclude
Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole Person Analysis
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”   “Available,31
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be
Id.32
Id.33
9
considered in reaching a determination.”   In evaluating Applicant’s case, in addition to the32
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I also considered the “whole person” concept in evaluating
Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests.   I considered his age (42),33
his education, his employment, his military service, and the causative factors of his financial
delinquencies.  He had financial problems from the outset of his marriage in 2000.  Even after having
his debts discharged in bankruptcy, he allowed himself to incur unpaid debts.  He recognized there
was a problem in 2001, and yet continued to live in the same manner for the next five years.  While
it might be easy to assess blame to his wife, he used poor judgment in not stepping in and correcting
the problem a long time ago.  This raises questions about his reliability and judgment.  The totality
of the record  raises reasonable and persistent doubts about Applicant's ability to protect classified
information and to exercise the requisite good judgment and discretion expected of one in whom the
government entrusts its interests.  I conclude that Applicant is not entitled to a favorable eligibility
determination.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the interest of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to a sensitive
position.  Eligibility is denied.
10
Christopher Graham
Administrative Judge
