DATE:  October 31, 2007
In re:
--------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-10018
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
NOREEN A. LYNCH
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant incurred approximately $16,572 in delinquent debt, including many charged off
collection accounts. He provided documentation concerning his payments in his repayment plan to
his creditors, and thus  mitigated the security concerns raised under the financial considerations
guideline. Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
In January 2007, Applicant’s case was terminated (ISCR -06-19209). In July 2007, the case was reactivated.2
The government submitted seven items in support of its contentions.3
Item 4 (Application for Security Clearance (SF 86), dated March 10, 2006).4
Id.5
Applicant’s answer to SOR, dated December 25, 2006.6
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 21, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance.  The SOR, which is in essence1
the administrative complaint, alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the
Department of Defense effective September 1, 2006. The revised guidelines were provided to
Applicant when the SOR was issued.
On November 29, 2006, Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR, and elected
to have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the
Government’s written case on August 3, 2007.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant2
material (FORM) on August 7, 2007, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.   Applicant submitted additional3
information on September 28, 2007. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted  allegations in subparagraphs  1.a through 1. f in his SOR response under
Guideline F. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete review of the
evidence in the record and upon due consideration, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After he graduated from the
USAF Preparatory School, he attended the USAF Academy. He is married with one son. He has
worked for his current employer since December 2006.  On February 15, 2006, he completed his4
security clearance (SF 86) application.5
Applicant held a secret level security clearance since 1995 with no incidents. He served in
the U.S. Air Force from 1994 until 2003, and received an honorable discharge. Applicant
encountered a brief period of unemployment after leaving the military.6
Applicant’s debts in the SOR total approximately $16,572. There are numerous delinquent
consumer accounts from the period 1994 until 2001. Applicant maintains that he was paying all his
Response to FORM, dated September 28, 2007.7
Id.8
Id. at 3.9
Item 3 (Answer to FORM, dated December 25, 2006).10
3
creditors in a timely manner, but fees and high interest rates forced him to fall behind (30 days) on
some of them. In 2001, Applicant entered a credit counseling program, and entered a debt
management program. His required monthly payments were $548 a month. Applicant participated
in this program for 19 months. He timely made each payment. He stopped the program in 2003. He
left the military at that point, and worked in the private sector. He had a short period of
unemployment. Applicant moved to an area of higher living costs and received a lower salary. He
incurred additional moving expenses and also did not receive his first paycheck for a few weeks after
the start of his employment. He contacted the consumer credit agency and tried to find another
repayment plan that would require less than $500 a month. He could not find one. He made smaller
payments to some of his individual creditors when he could.7
Applicant closed the accounts that were included in the debt repayment program. He made
no further charges on any of those accounts.
In 2002, Applicant married and a son was born to them in 2004. His son has congenital heart
disease and requires continuous medical care. Applicant has paid the medical bills and extra
expenses for his son.8
In 2004, Applicant purchased a car. He explained he made a conscious decision to do this
because he needed a car that would accommodate the baby car seat and other items necessary when
traveling with the baby. His previous vehicle had 100,000 miles on it and was starting to require
major repairs. He was paying $307 a month on the car note. He decided to trade his wife’s car to his
sister-in-law. His sister-in-law paid Applicant $307 a month for the car. Based on a trade in and
discounts, his monthly payment for the new car is $321. Thus, he maintained a similar level of
monthly payments and decreased maintenance costs.9
Applicant opened four new credit lines in 2004. He does not carry a balance on any of them.
He uses them for business travel. He has multiple credit cards because the credit limit on each was
approximately $500. He also wanted to establish a good credit history.
From 2003 until 2006, Applicant did not have sufficient income to make payments to his
creditors. He kept his finances under control by prioritizing his bills. As soon as Applicant had his
current job offer in late 2006, he contacted a new consumer credit company.10
In 2006, Applicant entered another repayment plan. He received more financial guidance, has
a new budget and started making monthly payments. He is saving money and due to his higher
salary, he has paid off two accounts that were not listed in the SOR. He has reduced his debt from
Attachments to Response to FORM, dated September 28, 2007.11
Attachment A (Pay Stub, dated September 2007).12
This balance decreased from $5,487.13
This balance decreased from $3,405.14
This balance decreased from $2,335.15
Item 5 (Response to Interrogatories, dated October 24, 2006).16
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  17
4
$21,302 to $11,936. His detailed payment plan provides that all accounts will be paid in less than
20 months. 11
He earns approximately $5,000 net per month working a regular schedule. He earns more
with overtime (approximately $7,800).  Applicant also receives a Veterans benefit ($115 per12
month).
The current status of Applicant’s alleged debts listed in the SOR is as follows:
SOR ¶ Type of Account/Amount Status Evidence
1.a Credit c  a r  d                $3,817 Repayment $196 mo Attachment C13
1.b Credit card                $2,803 Repayment $86 mo Attachment C14
1.c Collection account    $1,849 Repayment $54 mo Attachment D15
1.d Collection account     $1,126 Settled and paid Attachment E
1.e Collection account     $4,228 Repayment $141 mo Attachment F
Applicant earned various medals and commendations while in the military. Among them is
the Air Force Training Ribbon, Outstanding Unit Award. Although he has been with his current
employer a short while, he received an appraisal reflecting remarkable growth and development. He
has proven to be an invaluable asset. He does not require frequent direction and can be trusted to
pursue the issues most important to leadership.16
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position … that
will give that person access to such information.”   In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding17
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining trustworthiness within the
executive branch. 
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.1.18
 Directive, Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)¶2 (a)(1)-(9).19
 Id.20
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).23
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.24
5
To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an applicant must
meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive.  The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline.
Additionally, each security decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative
process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive, and AG ¶ 2(a).
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”    An administrative18
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available, reliable
information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the following factors: (1)19
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.   20
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR that
disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.21
Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the facts.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent22
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  Any doubt as to whether23
access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor
of the national security.  The same rules apply to trustworthiness determinations for access to24
sensitive positions.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. The government
has established a prima facie case for disqualification under Guideline F of the revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG) most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case.
AG ¶ 18.25
6
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.25
In this matter, the government provided substantial evidence that Applicant accrued  delinquent
debts with an approximate total balance of $16,000. He admits they are still outstanding debts except
for one that was settled. His 2007 credit report confirms his alleged debts. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. 
With the government’s case established, the burden shifts to Applicant to present evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against him. I considered the Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶20(a), (the behavior happened so long ago, was
so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). It does apply because
Applicant’s four debts are in a repayment plan. 
Applicant’s debt occurred before his short period of unemployment and his son’s medical
problems. His debt has been with him since the mid 1990's. He has no evidence to support the FC MC
AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person's control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
I have considered the remaining mitigating conditions. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem/and or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or under control) applies in this case. FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) also applies. FC MC AG ¶
20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) applies as well. 
Applicant has received financial counseling and developed a structured plan to resolve these
debts. Although he stopped his first repayment plan after 19 months due to a period of unemployment
after his discharge from the Air Force, he prioritized his bills. Due to the lower pay, he was not able
to pay the initial $548 a month in his payment plan. Thus, his original plan was derailed. He could not
find another plan that would accept an amount lower than $500. So, he made smaller payments to
creditors whenever he could. There are clear indications that the financial problem is being resolved
or is under control.
After his son was born with a medical problem, Applicant was faced with numerous medical
bills. This contributed to his inability to pay on his older debt. He paid his medical bills and provided
for his family. Applicant received a job in late 2006  that allowed him to again begin a repayment plan.
7
He documented his payment plan and has reduced his debts. He now has a stable, good income. He
has a solid plan and the determination to resolve his debts. 
Whole Person
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the trustworthy determination process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for assignment to sensitive
duties. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering
the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts,
omissions, motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.
I have considered all the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating Applicant’s security
clearance determination.  Applicant has a very good work history and performance review. He was
honorably discharged from the Air Force. He provides for his family and his son who has major
medical problems. His inability to initially stay on his repayment plan did not cause him to give up.
He has made good faith efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. His steady income and his financial
counseling will allow him to continue to remain solvent. The issue is not whether Applicant is still
legally liable for any or all of her outstanding debts, but whether he has presented sufficient evidence
of extenuation, mitigation or changed circumstances to warrant a favorable security determination.
Applicant has mitigated the government’s concerns under Guideline F. It is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is granted.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Clearance is granted.
8
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
