KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-07214.a1
DATE: 03/16/2007
DATE: March 16, 2007
In Re:
-------
SSN: --------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 04-07214
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On June 17, 2005,
DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On April 27, 2006, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Darlene Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
2
designation.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Rather, it contains new evidence, in the form of a statement from the Applicant, which indicates that
she has obtained a current copy of her credit report, determined the status of her outstanding debts,
enlisted the assistance of a credit attorney to clear up those debts, and is awaiting a plan of action
from that attorney.  The Board cannot consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party
has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  It does not review cases de novo. Applicant has not
made an allegation of harmful error.   Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
