KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: Department Counsel is persuasive that the Judge erred to the extent that his findings of
fact do not discuss the terrorist groups which operate in Jordan.  The Judge’s new whole person
discussion requires more analysis.  Favorable decision remanded.
CASENO: 04-11414.a1
DATE: 03/05/2007
DATE: March 5, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: -----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-11414
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer Goldstein Esq, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance. On August 4, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline
C (Foreign Preference), pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 16, 2006, after considering the
Department Counsel does not appeal the Administrative Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline C.1
2
record, Administrative Judge Christopher Graham granted Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Department Counsel submitted a timely appeal pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Administrative
Judge’s whole person analysis under Guideline B is unsupported by record evidence and is arbitrary,
capricious, and contrary to law.   We remand the case to the Administrative Judge.1
II. Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A. Facts
 
The Judge found that Applicant was born in Jordan but immigrated to the U.S. when he was
18 years old, eventually earning a degree in electrical engineering.  He became a citizen of the U.S.
in 1985.  Applicant’s wife is a native-born American.  They have four children and possess no
financial interests outside the U.S.  Applicant and his family have traveled to Jordan three times, in
1991, 1999, and 2002.  The first two were to visit relatives, the last was a stopover visit on the way
to a religious pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia.  
Applicant has held a Jordanian passport, as have all other members of his immediate family
except his youngest child.  Applicant’s passport expired in 2004.  He has expressed a willingness
to renounce his Jordanian citizenship, although Jordan requires the payment of a $2000 fee per
passport, which would total $10,000, more than Applicant can afford to pay.
Applicant’s parents and eight of his nine siblings are citizens and residents of Jordan.  The
ninth sibling is a Jordanian citizen residing in the U.S.  The Judge found that none of Applicant’s
relatives are employed by the government of Jordan.  The Judge found that Applicant speaks with
his mother once a month but that his contact with his siblings has occurred only during his visits to
Jordan.  
The Judge found that Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with excellent relations with the
United States.  He found that Jordan protects the rights of all its citizens.
B. Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Administrative Judge’s finding of facts is limited to
determining if they are supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable
mind might accept as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in
the record.” Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the
possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an
administrative agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Administrative Judge’s finding,
we are required to give deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
Directive ¶ E2A2.1.2.1.2
Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1.3
3
Except as noted below, the Department Counsel has not expressly challenged the Judge’s
findings of fact, although she provides a detailed description of facts drawn from the record, upon
which she states that her appeal brief relies.  The Board may consider whether a Judge’s factual
findings are based upon substantial evidence, presuming that issue is raised by the appealing party.
Failing that, we are bound by the findings as set forth in the decision, insofar as we have no de novo
fact finding power of our own.  See ISCR Case No. 03-11765, p. 3 (App. Bd. April 11, 2005).  
We note that in her discussion of the Judge’s whole person analysis, Department Counsel
criticizes the Judge for not considering the fact that terrorist groups operate within Jordan.  We
interpret this as a challenge to the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings.  We agree with the Department
Counsel that the presence of terrorist groups in Jordan is a factor which the Judge should have
weighed in his analysis, and accordingly we conclude that his facts are in error to the extent that he
made no finding on that matter.  Otherwise we conclude that the Judge’s findings are based upon
substantial evidence.
III. Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions.
An Administrative Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a
satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Administrative Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or
revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
Our scope of review under this standard is narrow and we may not substitute our judgment for that
of the Administrative Judge. We may not set aside an Administrative Judge’s decision “that is
rational, based on consideration of the relevant factors, and within the scope of the authority
delegated to the agency ...” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, 463 U.S. at 42. We review matters of law de
novo.
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s case raises Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition
(1): “An immediate family member, or a person to whom the individual has close ties of affection
or obligation, is a citizen of, or resident or present in, a foreign country.”  Furthermore, the Judge2
considered two Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FIMC): (1) “A determination that the
immediate family member(s) . . . in question are not agents of a foreign power or in a position to be
exploited by the foreign power in a way that could force the individual to choose between loyalty
to the person(s) involved and the United States;”  and (2) “Contact and correspondence with foreign3
Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.3.4
In analyzing MC1, the Judge made several problematic statements regarding law and Appeal Board precedent.5
He based his analysis in part upon the view that the term “agent of a foreign power” must be interpreted consistent with
50 U.S.C. §  435 et seq.  We have addressed the propriety of this approach in ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 5-6 (App. Bd.
January 5, 2007).  Another example is “[T]he Appeal Board prohibits any consideration of evidence that is not
dispositive of the issue.”  This Board places no such limitation on the admission or consideration of evidence, the
Directive requiring that “[e]ach clearance decision must  be a . . . common sense determination based on consideration
of all relevant and material information.” ¶ 6.3.  Compare ISCR Case No. 04-11571 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb 8, 2007).
Directive ¶  E2.2.1.  These factors are (1) the “nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;” (2) the6
“circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation;” (3) the “frequency and recency of the
conduct;” (4) the “individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;” (5) the “voluntariness of participation;” (6)
the “presence of absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes;” (7) the “motivation for the conduct;”
(8) the “potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;” and (9) the “likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
The Department Counsel supplied no exhibits about Jordan, the only such documents in the file having come7
from Applicant.  Most of these are from the web site of the Jordanian Embassy, and are filled with laudatory comments
about the country.  The only exhibit which bears the imprimatur of the U.S. is a State Department consular information
sheet.  It is in this exhibit that information about terrorist groups operating in Jordan is to be found.   
4
citizens are casual and infrequent.”   The Judge concluded that neither of these MC s apply.   He4 5
based his favorable decision on his whole person analysis.
Department Counsel argues that the whole person analysis is flawed.  Specifically,
Department Counsel states that, of the whole person factors listed in the Directive,  only “[t]he6
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress” is relevant to Applicant’s case.  Department
Counsel then argues that this one factor is not sufficient to overcome the security concerns inherent
in Applicant’s family relationships.  Furthermore, Department Counsel takes the Administrative
Judge to task for not considering the extent to which Applicant’s family, rather than simply
Applicant himself, would be subject to pressure, coercion, etc.  
The Board does not agree with Department Counsel that the factors listed in E2.2.1 are the
only ones that may be considered in performing a whole person analysis in a Guideline B case.
Other matters, such as evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties, the nature and extent of an
applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within
the U.S., and many others raised by the facts of a given case can properly be factored in to a judge’s
evaluation of an applicant’s worthiness of a security clearance.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-00631
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sept. 6, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-02878 at 3 (App. Bd. June 7, 2006).  The
consideration for the Board on appeal is whether in a given case a judge’s whole person analysis
supports his or her final decision.
The Judge did perform a whole person analysis, but one in which he focused almost solely
upon ¶  E2.2.1.8.  For reasons stated above, we conclude that the analysis is too narrowly focused.
Additionally, it is unreasonably conclusory.  For example, the Judge states that “it is helpful to
consider Applicant’s relatives’ vulnerability to exploitation by foreign powers in Jordan.”  He goes
on to say that the numerous relatives living in Jordan are indeed vulnerable to exploitation but that
Applicant, due to his maturity, successful employment, and loyalty to the U.S., is sufficiently
immune to exploitation as not to constitute a security risk.  The decision does not really explain why
it is so.  7
5
We remand the case to the Judge for a new opinion, one which takes into account the errors
which the Board has identified and one which includes a more detailed whole person analysis, an
analysis which takes into account record evidence about dangers existing in Jordan insofar as they
have a bearing upon the potential for coercion.  Also, as appropriate, it should detail and explain
Applicant’s pertinent qualities, characteristics, and circumstances which are the basis for the Judge’s
ultimate decision.
     
 Order
The judgment of the Administrative Judge denying Applicant a clearance is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
