KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: Given the Judge’s unchallenged findings of fact, the Judge made a reasonable
determination that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of mitigating his false statements. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-12778.a1
DATE: 03/19/2007
DATE: March 19, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-12778
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 5, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 29, 2006, after the hearing,
Applicant also argues for a different result because his job only requires access to a secure area rather than1
access to classified information itself.  However, this distinction is irrelevant, insofar as either type of access implicates
the national security interests of the United States and requires a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0055 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec.
31, 1998).
2
Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
submitted a timely appeal pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
The Board construes Applicant’s appeal brief as arguing that the Judge should have mitigated
the security concern addressed under Guidelines E and J, because his falsification of his security
clearance application amounted to an isolated incident.  Otherwise his brief does not make an
allegation of harmful error.1
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant, a 51 year old married employee of a
defense contractor, was arrested in October 1996 for speeding and possession of marijuana.  In 1998
he pled guilty to the marijuana charge and was placed on probation, with a deferred judgement.
Later, while still on probation, he smoked marijuana during a vacation to Florida.  Upon his return,
his probation officer directed Applicant to submit to a drug test, which yielded a positive result for
marijuana.  As a consequence, his probation was extended and he was required to submit to monthly
drug tests.  He subsequently failed one of these tests, which yielded a positive result for marijuana.
In addition to these incidents, Applicant used marijuana from 1992 to 1999, beginning on a
weekly basis but increasing his usage to several times a week.  Applicant no longer associates with
his drug using companions.  
On April 3, 2002, Applicant completed his security clearance application.  He answered “no”
to question 24, which inquired if he had ever been charged or convicted of an offense related to
alcohol or drugs.  Applicant stated that, since the charges in his marijuana possession case were
dismissed in 2000, he had a clean record and believed he could truthfully answer the question in the
negative.  Additionally, he answered “no” to question 27, which inquired if he had illegally used any
controlled substance during the previous 7 years.  Applicant admitted that he was afraid that a
truthful answer to this question would affect his employment.  
The application of  disqualifying or mitigating conditions requires the exercise of sound
discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App.
Bd. Jan. 15, 2003). As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge's weighing of the record evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See ISCR
Case No. 05-00609 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2006).
Given the Judge’s unchallenged findings in this case, we conclude that he made a reasonable
determination that Applicant had not met his burden of mitigating the Guideline E and J security
concerns raised by his false statements on the security clearance application.  Thus the Judge did not
err in denying Applicant a clearance. 
3
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
