KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-06059.a1
DATE: 03/02/2007
DATE: March 2, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN:-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-06059
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 28, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On July 24, 2006, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Barry M. Sax denied
Applicant asserts the Judge erred in finding that she is a “secretary for a defense contractor,” when in fact she1
is a “warehouse clerk.”  This error is harmless.
2
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed the Judge’s unfavorable clearance
decision.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.1
Rather, it contains new evidence, in the form of a statement from the Applicant and six character
reference letters.  It also contains a request for a 30 day continuance, so that Applicant can resolve
her financial problems by filing for bankruptcy.  
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  It does not review cases de novo, and has no authority
to continue Applicant’s case to allow her the opportunity to work on her financial problems.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006).  Applicant has not made an allegation
of harmful error.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is
AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin     
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                                   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
