KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline H
DIGEST: A judge can find an applicant engaged in criminal conduct even if criminal charges
were dropped or dismissed.  The Judge properly considered the record as a whole, rather than
analyzing the evidence piecemeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-02833.a1
DATE: 03/19/2007
DATE: March 19, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-02833
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 27, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 27, 2006, Administrative Judge
The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline D.  That favorable finding is not at issue on appeal.
1
2
Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant submitted a timely
appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  1
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable security
clearance decision under Guideline J is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision should be reversed
because, apart from the July 2006 arrest for second degree assault, Applicant’s other criminal
incidents date from the 1980s and, therefore, are not recent.  Applicant also argues that the Judge
erred in not applying a Guideline I Mitigating Condition 3 to mitigate his conduct under Guideline
J.  In support of his argument, Applicant presents new documentary evidence to establish that he was
acquitted of the 2006 charge subsequent to the hearing in this case, and that he also has demonstrated
rehabilitation by participating in marriage counseling.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate
that the Judge erred.
The Board may not consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Its submission does not demonstrate error on the part of the Administrative Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 02-12789 at 3 (App. Bd. May 13, 2005). 
A Judge can find an applicant has engaged in criminal conduct even if the criminal charges
against the applicant were dropped or dismissed.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-11906 at 3 (App. Bd.
July 19, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-21761 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 28, 2005).  The ultimate state court
dispositions of Applicant’s criminal incident did not preclude the Judge from making a finding
adverse to the Applicant.  The Judge was not required, as a matter of law, to apply a Guideline I
Mitigating Condition 3 with respect to security concerns raised under Guideline J.  Considering the
record as a whole, the Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s conduct of security
concern reflect a plausible interpretation of the record evidence. 
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them applies to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires
the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not
alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge properly considered the significance of Applicant’s pattern of conduct
as a whole, rather than analyzing each separate criminal incident in a piecemeal fashion.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-12648 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 20, 2006) citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F. 2d 860
(2  Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is missing when eachnd
event is viewed in isolation).  The Judge based her adverse decision, in part, on the fact that
Applicant had not offered any independent evidence of rehabilitation and positive changes in
3
behavior.  It was not unreasonable for the Judge to expect the Applicant to present evidence to
establish mitigation in that regard.
In her decision, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions.  She found for Applicant with respect to the Guideline H allegations.
However, the Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in
mitigation under Guideline J was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.  The
Board does not review a case de novo.  Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate
unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline J is not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed;William S. Fields     
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
