KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s two erroneous factual findings are harmless.  Applicant has not
demonstrated that the Judge’s adverse conclusion is erroneous.
CASENO: 06-07145.a1
DATE: 03/05/2007
DATE: March 5, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-07145
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 16, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On August 9, 2006, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge James A. Young denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
The Judge made statements in the conclusion section of his decision which the Board construes as additional1
findings of fact.
2
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant  raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred with respect to a
finding of fact; whether the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns raised by
Applicant’s financial situation had not been mitigated.
   
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  The Administrative Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:
In the SOR, DOHA alleged Applicant had medical bills
totaling more than $22,100 that were in collection status (¶¶ 1.a–1.g,
1.m–1.n) and past due accounts to the New Mexico Educational
Assistance Foundation (NMEAF) totaling more than $14,700 (¶¶
1.h–1.l, 1.o).  Applicant admitted each of the allegations, with
explanation. 
Applicant is a 25-year-old engineering assistant for a defense
contractor. He graduated from college with a bachelor of science
degree in May 2004. 
Applicant submitted a settlement agreement with the NMEAF
that shows NMEAF filed a civil action against him for failing to pay
on his education loans.  It appears NMEAF was willing to agree to
settle the action totaling more than $13,914, grant Applicant a
forbearance for a couple of months, but resume regular payments on
the debt starting in May 2006.  The settlement agreement is unsigned
and Applicant provided no evidence that shows he has made any
payments.
From January 2004 until August 2005, Applicant was either
unemployed or earned less than $10 an hour and was unable to make
payments on his outstanding medical debts. In his response to the
FORM, Applicant submitted a receipt showing that he paid $40
toward one of his medical accounts, leaving a balance of $12.82 on
that account.  1
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s finding of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record. Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1. “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
Decision at 2.2
Decision at 3.3
File of Relevant Material (FORM), Item 3 at 1, 11-15.4
3
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding
from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607,
621, 86 S. Ct. 1018, 16 L. Ed. 2d 131 (1966)).  In evaluating the Judge’s finding, we are required to
give deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
In his findings of fact, the Judge states that: “The settlement agreement is unsigned and
Applicant provided no evidence that shows he has made any payments.”   The Judge reiterates this2
finding in his conclusion, stating: “He submitted no evidence to establish the settlement with
NMEAF was formalized or that he is making payments.”   Applicant argues that these findings are3
erroneous and are a product of the Judge’s misinterpretation of the record evidence.  Applicant’s
argument has merit.
Applicant acknowledges that the copy of the settlement agreement which he attached to his
Answer is the unsigned version.  However, Applicant points out that he stated in his Answer to the
SOR that the accounts with NMEAF had been brought current, and attached copies of February 9,
2006, March 31, 2006, and April 29, 2006 letters from NMEAF which stated that Applicant’s
request for a special payment arrangement had been approved.  These letters also described
Applicant’s monthly payment plan and schedule with the NMEAF under the agreement.  They were
offered as evidence by the Government as part of its case, and there was no objection from the
Applicant.   4
Applicant’s payment  plan with the NMEAF provided for a forbearance period, and stated
that Applicant’s first payment was due May 15, 2006.  Applicant’s credit report, dated June 22,
2006, indicates that Applicant may have made at least one payment under the plan.  Therefore, the
Judge’s finding that there is no evidence Applicant was making payments under the plan is
erroneous.  The Judge’s findings that Applicant had submitted no evidence to establish the
settlement with NMEAF was formalized is also erroneous.  However, these errors are harmless
because the Judge was not required to conclude, as a matter of law, that Applicant had mitigated the
government’s security concerns, based upon the record that was before him.
   
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Appeal Board may reverse the Administrative Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security
clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  Our scope of review
under this standard is narrow, and we may not substitute our judgment for that of the Administrative
Judge.  We review matters of law de novo.
4
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns raised by
his history of financial difficulties had not been mitigated.  In support of that contention, Applicant
argues that his unpaid debts are not recent, that they had resulted from circumstances beyond his
control, and were therefore isolated incidents.  He also argues that he has initiated a good-faith effort
to pay off the debts he acknowledges and is disputing the others.  The Board does not find these
arguments persuasive.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the
trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the financial considerations allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly
disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  Moreover, the Board has previously noted
that it is reasonable to expect applicants to have documentation about efforts to satisfy specific debts.
See ISCR Case No. 03-23511 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006). 
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy history of not meeting financial
obligations.  At the time the case was submitted for decision, Applicant still had approximately
$22,000 in unpaid debts for medical expenses, and almost $14,000 in unpaid debts for education
loans for which he had only recently negotiated a repayment plan.  Regarding his medical debts,
Applicant had documented the payment of only one small debt in the amount of $40.  In light of the
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still
ongoing.  See ISCR Case No. 03-26213 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 23, 2006).  The Judge weighed the
mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying
conduct and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating conditions.  The Judge
articulated a rational basis for not applying the mitigating conditions in this case, and reasonably
explained why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to
overcome the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Administrative
Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at
4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
5
 Order
The Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple             
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
