KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: This 49 -year-old software engineer committed three crimes (two drug-related, in
1994 and 2004 and one for spousal abuse in 1994.  He also knowing omitted any mention of
the 1994 drug arrest in his 2003/2004 security clearance application, in violation of 10 U.S.C.
1001, a felony.  Mitigation has not been adequately established.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-17335.h1
DATE: 03/15/2007
DATE: March 15, 2007
In Re:
------------------------
SSN: -----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17335
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
This 49 -year-old software engineer committed three crimes (two drug-related, in 1994
and 2004 and one for spousal abuse in 1994.  He also knowing omitted any mention of the
2
1994 drug arrest in his 2003/2004 security clearance application, in violation of 10 U.S.C.
1001, a felony.  Mitigation has not been adequately established.  Clearance is  denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 31, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant.  The
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
required under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for the Applicant.  The SOR recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether a clearance should be
granted, denied or revoked.
On November 2, 2006, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth in the SOR,
and elected to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge after a hearing. The
case was assigned to me December 15, 2006. A Notice of Hearing was issued on January 8,
2007. The hearing was conducted on February 16, 2007.  The Government introduced  nine
exhibits (GX) 1-9 and one timely submitted post hearing exhibit (GX 10).  Applicant testified
and introduced 16 exhibits (AX) A - P).  The transcript was received at DOHA on February
27, 2007.   
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  The February 24, 2005
SOR contains four (4) allegations under Guideline J and two (2) allegations under Guideline
E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant admits the basic fact of allegations 1.a.- 1,d, but adds
explanations.  Only the specific admissions are accepted as such and deemed to be findings
of fact.  He denies allegation 2.a.  
After considering the totality of the evidence, I make the following additional
FINDINGS OF FACT as to the status of each SOR allegation.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
1.a. - Applicant was arrested on or about June 2, 1994, in State A, and charged with
being “Under the Influence of a Controlled Substance.”  His criminal proceedings were
suspended for one year and he was granted diversion.  When he had successfully completed
the diversion program, the charge against him was dismissed.  Applicant explains the
problem as arising during a “particularly bitter divorce” (Response). 
3
1.b. - Applicant was arrested on or about September 29, 1994, in State A, and charged
with (1) Inflict Injury/Spouse; (2) Inflict Corporal Injury; and (3) Battery.  The criminal
proceedings were suspended for one year, he was granted diversion, and he was required to
perform 20 hours of volunteer service.  Applicant views his wife as the instigator of the
situation leading to his arrest.
1.c. - Applicant was arrested on or about July 27, 2004, in State A, and charged with
Possession of a Controlled Narcotic Substance (Cocaine/Base Rock).  He was observed by
undercover officers buying rock cocaine. The criminal proceedings were suspended for six
months, he was granted drug diversion, ordered to participate in substance abuse classes for
six months, to participate in random drug testing, and to pay a $500 fee.  He was also issued
a Restraining Order to stay away from the drug dealer. On or about February 3, 2005, the
charge was dismissed.  Applicant admits the incident and he has “no excuse for [his] actions”
(Id.).     
1.d. - The falsification alleged in 2.b., below, constitutes a violation of 18 U.S.C.
1001, a felony.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
2.a. - Applicant falsified material facts on his security clearance application (SF 86),
dated July 30, 2003, and resigned by him on July 2, 2004, his response to the following
question: “24. Your Police Record - Alcohol/Drug Offenses  For this item, report
information regardless of whether the record in your case has been ‘sealed’ or otherwise
stricken from the court record.  [The only exception is not applicable under the facts of this
case].  Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or
drugs,” to which he answered “No,” and intentionally failed to disclose his 1994 drug use,
as alleged in 1.a., above. 
POLICIES
 Each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense determination
based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent
criteria and adjudication policy in enclosure 2, including as appropriate: (1) Nature and
seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances; (2) Frequency and recency of
the conduct; (3) Age of the applicant. (4) Motivation of the applicant, and the extent to
which the conduct was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of the
consequences involved; (5) Absence or presence of rehabilitation; and (6) Probability that
the circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future. 
The eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive
5220.6  identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the
ultimate question of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” for an
individual to hold a security clearance.  An applicant’s admission of the information in
4
specific allegations relieves the Government of having to prove those allegations.  If specific
allegations and/or information are denied or  otherwise controverted by the applicant, the
Government has the initial burden of proving those  controverted facts alleged in the
Statement of Reasons.  
If the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security  concerns under the Directive, the burden
of persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present  evidence in refutation, extenuation or
mitigation sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within
specific criteria in the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national
security to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based upon trust and confidence.  As required by DoD Directive
5220.6, as amended, at E2.2.2., “any doubt as to whether access to classified information is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the
nation’s security.”
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a 49-year-old software engineer. 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
The three criminal offenses that led to his arrest occurred in June and September 1994
and lastly, in July 2004.  The June 1994 arrest (SOR 1.a.) involved Applicant’s use of a
Controlled Substance (GX 3 and GX 4).  The case was dismissed after Applicant successfully
completed a diversion program (GX 4).  This arrest is now some 13 years old.  The July 2004
arrest involved his purchase of rock cocaine, which was admitted by Applicant and observed
by undercover police officers (Response, GX 3).  The circumstance of the 2004  arrest  is
discussed by Applicant in considerable detail in his sworn statement (GX 2).  This arrest
shows incredibly poor judgment on his part in buying drugs from a person he did not know
on behalf of individuals he did not know (Tr at 41-44). 
Other adverse factors relating to the 2004 arrest are (1) it came after he first signed
the security clearance application in 2003; (2) there is now evidence of Applicant’s using
illegal drugs, “from high school to 1989" (“rarely, because he was in the military at the
time”), including attending the U.S. Air Force Academy from 1975-1979) (Tr at 35), and
again in 1993-1994 (about a gram a week), while he working for his present employer, a
defense contractor (GX 1).  In the context of the entire record, it is impossible to conclude
that the incidents cited in the SOR are the only times Applicant has possessed, used, and/or
purchased illegal drugs.  In addition, the 1994 arrest occurred when Applicant possessed a
DoD  security clearance (Tr at 36-38).  
I have carefully considered Applicant’s documentation.  One letter, from a “recovery
center” dated April 4,1995, cites his successful completion of the program and his discharge
on November 14, 1994.  The letter expresses the Center’s hope that Applicant would learn
from his mistake and avoid involvement with illegal drugs in the future (AX A).  It is clear
5
he did not do so.  The record makes it impossible to conclude with any level of confidence
that Applicant’s drug involvement is unlikely to happen again. To the contrary, I conclude
that Applicant’s drug use/involvement remains current.
The second 1994 arrest (SOR 1.b.) involved spousal abuse (AX DAX E, AX F, AX
G).  While Applicant claims the charges were false, and contrived by his angry wife (Tr at
56-59), the arrest is supported by the police report citing “red marks” on the wife’s arms, and
no apparent injury to Applicant (GX 6 and AX B), and is not refuted by contrary evidenc.
I have also carefully considered Applicant’s letters of recommendation (AX H - AX
J) and work evaluations (AX K and AX P).  It is obvious that he is viewed as an asset to his
company, but none of the documents address or mitigate the concerns expressed in the SOR.
The Concern: A history of criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
Disqualifying Conditions: (1) any criminal activity, regardless of whether the
individual was actually charged; and (2) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.
Mitigating Conditions: None that are established by the record.  
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
Applicant admits he knew about the September 1994 arrest, but did not report it (Tr
at 62-64).  His explanation is basically that his attorney told him that he could properly say
that he had never been convicted since he had successfully completed a diversion program.
However, the  language of Question 24 was explicitly designed to cover this situation: “For
this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your case has been sealed
or otherwise stricken from the court record.  The single exception [involving a Federal drug
statute, is clearly not applicable  in this case].”  Applicant read this question and answered
“No” without any explanation.  In his testimony, he did not provide any basis for concluding
that he had innocently misconstrued or misinterpreted the operative language of Question
24.  His explanation lacks any support in the record and is simply not credible.        
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
Disqualifying Condition: (2). The deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire [SF 86], personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Mitigating Conditions: None that are supported by the record; e.g., (2). The
falsification  remains recent, and the individual did not subsequently provide correct
information voluntarily; or  (3). The individual did not make a prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct  the falsifications before being confronted with the facts.
6
Overall, the record evidence establishes that Applicant committed the crimes alleged
in the SOR and that he knew and had reason to know that his answer to Question 24 was
false. Looking at Applicant in the context of the whole person concept, he has simply not
come close to overcoming the evidence supporting the Government’s concerns, as stated in
the SOR.  It is basic to the security clearance adjudication process that the ultimate burden
of proof is on the Applicant  to demonstrate that he is eligible to possess a security clearance,
as he did in the past.  The record compels the conclusion that he has simply not demonstrated
he currently possesses the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of anyone
seeking access to the nation’s secrets.
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7 of Enclosure 1 of the Directive
are hereby rendered as follows:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) Against the Applicant 
Subparagraph  l.a.           Against the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.b.               Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.c.           Against the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.d.             Against the Applicant
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a.           Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
BARRY M. SAX
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
  
