KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: This 30-year-old employee has a history of 12 delinquent debts that began in 2000 and
continue to the present.  The debts cited in the SOR total more then $27,000 and more debts were
admitted at the hearing.  Applicant falsified his Public Trust Position Application by citing only one
delinquent debt and intentionally omitting those cited in the SOR.  Some reimbursement has been
made through garnishment, and Applicant has retained an attorney to file for bankruptcy protection.
Numerous fellow employees and others are consistent in averring that Applicant is a man who can
be trusted to protect classified information.  Applicant is on the path to financial rehabilitation.
Adequate mitigation has been established.  Eligibility for Trustworthiness Determination is granted.
Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-14232.h1
DATE: 03/15/2007
DATE: March 15, 2007
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-14232
AMENDED DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
This 30-year-old employee has a history of 12 delinquent debts that began in 2000 and
continue to the present.  The debts cited in the SOR total more then $27,000 and more debts were
admitted at the hearing.  Applicant falsified his Public Trust Position Application by citing only one
delinquent debt and intentionally omitting those cited in the SOR.  Some reimbursement has been
made through garnishment, and Applicant has retained an attorney to file for bankruptcy protection.
Numerous fellow employees and others are consistent in averring that Applicant is a man who can
be trusted to protect classified information.  Applicant is on the path to financial rehabilitation.
Adequate mitigation has been established.  Eligibility for Trustworthiness Determination is granted.
Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 31, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant.  The
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
required under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a trustworthiness determination allowing Applicant to work in Automated Data
Processing positions such as ADP I, II, or III.  The SOR recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether such a finding should
be granted, denied or revoked.
On November 29, 2006, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth in the SOR,
and elected to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge after a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on December 18, 2006.  A  Notice of Hearing was issued on January
8, 2006, setting the hearing for February 13, 2007. At the hearing, Department Counsel
introduced seven (7) exhibits (Government’s Exhibits (GX) 1-7.  Applicant introduced six (6)
exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A - F).  He has also submitted post hearing documents
that have been marked and admitted as AX G-AX T.  The hearing transcript was received at
DOHA on February 22, 2007.
It has been brought to my attention that I had agreed at the February 3, 2007 hearing
to keep the record open until Close of Business on March 6, 2007, to allow Applicant to
obtain and submit additional documents.  I inadvertently moved too quickly and issued a
Decision on February 28, 2007.  Applicant did submit additional documents after the Decision
was issued, but before the time allowed had expired.  Applicant is entitled to have those
documents evaluated and considered by me in making my decision.  Accordingly, I have
considered the new material and have issued this Amended Decision.
FINDINGS OF FACT
3
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  The SOR contains 12
allegations under Guideline F (Financial).  Applicant admits allegations except for 1.b., and
1.c., with explanations.  Applicant denies allegation 2.a., under Guideline E (Personal
Conduct).  All admissions are accepted and incorporated herein as Findings of Fact.  
After considering the totality of the evidence, I make the following additional
FINDINGS OF FACT as to the status of each SOR allegation.
Guideline F (Financial) 
Applicant has a history of 12 delinquent debts owed to the following creditors in the
approximate amounts cited:
1.a.   Creditor A (placed for collection in May 2000)------------------------------$1,000.00
1.b.  Creditor B (placed for collection in June 2001) ----------------------------- $5,913.00
1.c.  Creditor C (placed for collection in March 2002)--------------------------- $2,710.00
1.d. Creditor D (charged off in November 2002) --------------------------------
$18,384.00  1.e. Creditor E (placed for collection in August 2003) ----------------------------
$220.00 
 1.f. Creditor F (placed for collection in November 2003) ---------------------$2,240.00
1.g. Creditor G (placed for collection) -----------------------------------------------
$1,437.00 1.h. Creditor H (placed for collection in November 2004)-----------------------
$150.00
1.i. Creditor I (placed for collection in May 2005) ------------------------------- $38700
1.j. Creditor J (placed for collection in July 2005)-------------------------------   $534.00
1.k. Creditor K (placed for collection in January 2006) ------------------------- $210.00
1.l.  Creditor L (placed or collection in March 2006) ----------------------------$310.00
The 12 delinquent debts total about $27,917.00.  As of March 6, 2007, Applicant
decided to file for bankruptcy and has signed a contract with a law firm to begin the
bankruptcy process (AX G).   
Applicant has submitted a number or letters of recommendation (AX H-AX O).  The
specific language of each letter can be combined into a number of common themes describing
Applicant as: hardworking, loyal, trustworthy, dependable, excellent work ethic (AX H, AX
J, AX K, AX L), character of the highest caliber as to his honesty, sincere and truthful,
reliable (AX I), highly respected (AX L), positive attitude (AX M), responsible in paying his
share of th rent (AX N)   
 Guideline E (Personal Conduct)  
4
2.a. - Applicant falsified material facts on his Public Trust Position Application (SF
85P) of March 21, 2005, in which he answered Question 20 - Your Financial Record - 180
Day Delinquencies Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial
obligation; to which he listed only an auto loan with Company X, but deliberately omitted any
mention of the debts cited above in 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g.  As I understand
Applicant’s answer to the sole allegation under Guideline E, he admits the incorrect answer,
but denies it was deliberate.
POLICIES 
In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the adjudicator should consider
the following nine generic factors: (1). The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3). The
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the
conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence (Directive, E.2.2.1., on page 16 of Enclosure 2).  I have considered all nine factors,
individually and collectively, in reaching my overall conclusion.
The eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive
5220.6  identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the
ultimate question of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” for an
individual to hold a security clearance.  An applicant’s admission of the information in
specific allegations relieves the Government of having to prove those allegations.  If specific
allegations and/or information are denied or  otherwise controverted by the applicant, the
Government has the initial burden of proving those  controverted facts alleged in the
Statement of Reasons.  
If the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security  concerns under the Directive, the burden
of persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present  evidence in refutation, extenuation or
mitigation sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within
specific criteria in the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national
security to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based upon trust and confidence.  As required by DoD Directive 5220.6,
as amended, at E2.2.2., “any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the nation’s
5
security.”
CONCLUSIONS 
Applicant is 30 years old.  All 12 allegations under Guideline F are supported by the
record.  The earliest delinquent debt (1.a.) was referred for collection in May 2000 and the
last one (1.l), was referred for collection in March 2006.  All of the debts remain owing, but
some payments have been made by garnishment (GX 4, GX5, and GX 6 and the other
Government documents (GX 1, GX 2, and GX 3).
At the hearing, Applicant testified that his salary is presently being garnished for a
student loan [debt] (Tr at 19).  Leave and Earning Statements show garnishment of $840.78
as of February 23, 2007 (AX Q, AX P, AX R).  His exhibits mostly consist of documents
captioned “View Paycheck” (AX A, AX B, AX C, AX D, AX E, and AX F).  These cover the
period from September 15, 2006 to November 24, 2006.   
Applicant explained that the documents show “the financial pinch I was put in when
the garnishment had taken place,” because his net income dropped from about $1,200.00 to
a little under $600.00 a paycheck, “which hampered a lot of my ability” (Tr at 21).  He “was
trying to file for bankruptcy some time during those months and [he] couldn’t do it because
they needed a very large payment to get it started.  And being a single father, [he] was not
able to do it” (Id).  In addition one creditor was “removing funds from my pay and its getting
paid by a judgment . . .”   
At the hearing on February 13, 2007, Applicant explained that as to allegations:
1.a., 1.b., 1.e., and 1.l,  he was not sure what the debts were for and/or had been
unsuccessful in contacting them (Tr at 27, 29). 
1.c., 1and 1.h.,  he believes the debt was “supposed to be taken care of by his ex-wife”
and he will have to take the initiative to resolve the debts (Tr at 27, 28, 29).  
    
1.d., the debt  pertains to a “repossessed car” that he  returned when he was unable to
keep up with the payments.  He has not been able to contact anyone to resolve the debt (Tr
at 28, 29) 
1.f. and 1.g, the debts are for student loans - these are the debts that are being
recovered by garnishment of funds from his salary (Tr at 29).
1.i., 1.j., and 1,k, he has been unsuccessful in reaching an agreement with the creditor
(Id.).      
6
The record is compelling that Applicant has had significant delinquent debts going
back to at least 2000 and continuing to the present.  In his exhibits (AX A - AX E), the record
shows deductions of “Medical - $555.59” that are not cited in the SOR.  These are for
recoupment of “disability payments” (Tr at 35) to which Applicant was apparently not
entitled.
Applicant testified that he had recently contacted a “creditor counselor” and made an
appointment for February 23, 2007, ten days after the hearing (Tr at 30). This contact has
resulted in an agreement whereby a law firm will begin the bankruptcy process (AX G, AX
S, and AX T).  Whatever risk there was in the past, when he owed more than $27,000, that
risk is minimized by the ongoing resolution of his debt situation by payments and bankruptcy
The Concern expressed in Financial Consideration cases is that: an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Unexplained affluence is often linked to proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Disqualifying Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying
include: (1). A history of not meeting financial obligations; and (3). Inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts.  
Mitigating Conditions: (3). The conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or
a death, divorce or separation); and (6). The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
2.a. - I have carefully considered Applicant’s explanations for the false answer (Tr at
30, 31).  He admits the answer was false, but he denies it was intentional.  He answered
“Yes,” and cited one debt, but omitted the others.  His reasoning remains unclear as to why
he answered this way, but he continues to deny it was deliberate. Under the totality of the
circumstances, and viewing Applicant under the whole person concept, his answer remains
strange, but credible and a solitary act of questionable conduct.  
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified information. 
Disqualifying Conditions: 2. The deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Mitigating Conditions: (2)The falsification was an isolated incident, although it remains
recent. 
7
Applicant could certainly have exercised better judgment in the past under both
guidelines.  He is late coming to financial rehabilitation, but he has begun the journey with
a better understanding of his financial responsibilities than he had prior to the hearing.
Viewing Applicant under the whole person concept, the totality of the evidence, I conclude
there is minimal likelihood of continuation or recurrence (Directive, E.2.2.1., page 16 of
Enclosure 2).  
Applicant’s post hearing evidence, including the praise of so many coworkers, makes a case
that he has matured and can be relied upon to follow the rules.  On this basis, I conclude he
adequately mitigated the concerns expressed under Guideline E. 
Overall, I conclude that Applicant has demonstrated that he currently possesses the judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness required of someone seeking access to the nation’s secrets. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7 of Enclosure 1 of the Directive are
hereby rendered as follows:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)  For the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.a.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.b.              For the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.c.           For the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.d.   For the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.e.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.f.               For the Applicant
            Subparagraph  l.g.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.h.               For the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.i.           For the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.j.               For the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.k.           For the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.l.                                             For the Applicant
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) For the Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a.                                             For the Applicant  
         
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
BARRY M. SAX
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
8
 
