  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02499
SSN: ------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on April 29, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to an
administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in this
case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial
problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 See Applicant’s hearing testimony for a narrative description of the debts and their status (Tr. 28–32).3
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on June 12, 2008, and he requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on July 21, 2008. The hearing took place as scheduled on
August 13, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 21, 2008.
The record was left open until August 27, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity
to submit additional documentary evidence. He did so, and his three-page submission is
admitted as Exhibit G. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges ten delinquent debts for a total of about
$21,000. Also alleged is that Applicant had a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case filed and
discharged in 1991–1992. Applicant’s Answer was mixed. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He served on active
duty in the Army during 1986–1990. Since then, he has worked as a contractor at or
near the same large Army post. He has worked as a video-teleconference (VTC)
manager since 1994, and he has worked for his current employer since 2005. His gross
annual salary is about $65,000. He is seeking to retain a security clearance. 
Applicant is married to his second wife. His first marriage ended in divorce in
1996, and he remarried in 1999. His wife is employed as a nurse for a local school
district. She has a gross annual income of about $23,000. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he does not dispute. His
history of financial problems is established by the 1991 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case,
which was based primarily on unsecured credit card debt, and the more recent
problems as revealed in credit reports from 2006 and 2008 (Exhibits 2 and 3). The ten
debts alleged in the SOR are summarized in the following table.3
3
Debts Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–$67 collection account. Settled for $67 (Exhibit A).
SOR ¶ 1.b–$482 medical account. Settled for $250 (Exhibit A). 
SOR ¶ 1.c–$207 collection account. Settled in full (Exhibits A and F).
SOR ¶ 1.d–$5,200 unpaid government
debt.
Actual debt is $6,116; settled for $2,601
(Exhibit A).
SOR ¶ 1.e–$6,268 unpaid government
debt.
Same debt as SOR ¶ 1.d.
SOR ¶ 1.f–$153 collection account. Settled for $76 (Exhibit A).
SOR ¶ 1.g–$2,458 charged-off credit
card account.
Settled for $1,500 (Exhibits A and D).
SOR ¶ 1.h–$5,383 charged-off credit
card account.
Settled for $2,933 (Exhibits A and E).
SOR ¶ 1.i–$356 charged-off account. Intends to settle for $231 in Sep. 2008
(Exhibit A).
SOR ¶ 1.j–$800 charged-off credit card
account.
Disputes; account has zero balance and
unable to find any information on debt.
Has current credit card with same
creditor (Exhibits A and C).
In addition to the debts in the SOR, Applicant has another $236 collection
account that he intends to resolve later this year (Exhibits C and G at 1).
Applicant attributes the Chapter 7 bankruptcy to financial irresponsibility. Both he
and his first wife had a habit of “spend and go” (Tr. 45).
He attributes his most recent financial problems to his use of alcohol. He says
90% of his financial problems were due to his excessive alcohol consumption and 10%
was due to procrastination (Tr. 54–55). He has abstained from alcohol since June 2007
(Tr. 50–54). In doing so, Applicant obtained treatment for depression, and he  explained
the benefits of abstaining from alcohol as follows:
I will tell you that not in 52 years have I experienced such a joy,
satisfaction in life, in my marriage, with my grandchildren, my daughter. It
has absolutely been a turnaround, turning point in my life, sir. I can’t
explain how broad of a spectrum it has improved my quality in terms of my
health, how I feel just on a day-to-day basis. I still take an antidepressant
every day (Tr. 52).  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
4
Applicant resolved nearly all the debts in the SOR in 2008 after he obtained an
unsecured loan from two siblings. In late May 2008, he borrowed $9,500 (interest free)
and agreed to pay it off with 21 monthly payments of $450 and one payment of $50
(Exhibit G at 3). He made his first two $450 monthly payments in July and August 2008. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any6
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order7
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting8
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An9
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate10
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme11
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating15
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 16
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 17
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 18
5
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically15
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be16
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting17
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more18
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. In addition, another
 DC 6 is “financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling problems, or other issues19
of security concern.”
6
disqualifying condition is raised because his recent financial problems are linked to
excessive consumption of alcohol.   19
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered, and MC 1, MC 3, and MC 4 apply
in Applicant’s favor. 
MC 1 applies for two reasons. First, it applies to Applicant’s Chapter 7
bankruptcy case because it happened during Applicant’s first marriage, which
subsequently ended in divorce. The circumstances of that marriage, which contributed
to the bankruptcy, are unlikely to recur. Second, it applies to Applicant’s most recent
financial problems because those problems are linked to excessive drinking. He has
abstained from alcohol for more than one year, and he is enjoying the benefits of
sobriety. Given these circumstances, additional financial problems linked to excessive
drinking are unlikely to recur.
7
MC 3 applies under a similar rationale as MC 1. It applies because the chief
cause of his financial problems—excessive drinking—is a thing of the past as he has
abstained from alcohol since June 2007. It appears Applicant has made a genuine
commitment to sobriety. Given these circumstances, there are clear indications that his
excessive drinking is resolved and under control.  
MC 4 applies based on Applicant’s well-documented efforts to resolve the
delinquent debts as revealed in the table above. He did so with the benefit of a family
loan, but he signed a promissory note and has already made his first two monthly
payments. Taken together, these circumstances qualify as initiating a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain
a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept
was given due consideration and that analysis supports a favorable decision. This case
is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
