Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and1
modified.
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program2
(Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 03-08257
SSN:                    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Robert D. L’Heureux, Esquire
_________________
Remand Decision
_________________
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s noncompliance with security regulations in 1999 and 2000 raised
doubts about his trustworthiness and ability to safeguard classified information.  At his
hearing on remand, Applicant produced credible refutation and mitigation for five of six
alleged Guideline K security violations.  However, his personal conduct, when reviewed
in light of a whole person analysis, raised security concerns which he failed to mitigate.
Clearance is denied.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant.  On March 23, 2005, under the applicable
Executive Order  and Department of Defense Directive,  DOHA issued a Statement of1 2
Reasons (SOR), detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under
Guideline K (Security Violations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Directive.
 None of the documents offered by Applicant contained markings indicating they were classified documents.3
2
On April 11, 2005, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and elected to
have a hearing before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me
November 22, 2005. On February 24, 2006, I convened a hearing to consider whether it
was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant.  I continued Applicant's hearing, and it resumed on March 8, 2006.  The
Government called no witnesses, introduced 13 exhibits (Ex.), and offered one
document for administrative notice.
Applicant, who appeared pro se, objected to each of the Government’s proposed
exhibits. His objections were overruled. Applicant called no witnesses. Three of
Applicant’s proposed exhibits, D, F, and G, were e-mails composed and transmitted
when Applicant was employed by a previous government contractor.  Applicant was
unable to affirm that matters referred to in the e-mails were not classified.  I did not
admit Applicant’s  Ex. D, F, and G.  I returned the three exhibits to him, advised him to
consult with an attorney or his security manager about the documents in question, and
continued the hearing.
When his hearing resumed on March 8, 2006, Applicant again appeared pro se
and attempted to introduce four additional e-mail documents and was unable to affirm
that the documents did not contain or allude to classified information.   I returned the3
documents to Applicant, and did not admit them to the record.
  
Applicant introduced 10 documents which were not admitted into evidence.  He
withdrew one proposed exhibit before it was identified. The following exhibits introduced
by Applicant were admitted into evidence:  Ex. A, C, I, J, K, L1 through L-8, M, N, O, P,
Q, R, S, T, U, and V.   DOHA received the transcript (Tr. I ) of the February 24, 2006
proceeding on March 6, 2006; it received  the transcript (Tr. II ) of the March 8, 2006
proceeding on March 16, 2006. 
On June 12, 2006, I issued a decision denying Applicant’s security clearance.
Applicant appealed.  On February 8, 2007, DOHA’s Appeal Board found it could not
conclude from the record that Applicant had received the due process provided for in
Executive Order 10865 and the Directive, and it remanded the case and directed me to
reopen the case and provide Applicant with a new hearing.  The Appeal Board pointed
out that it was error for me to fail to preserve a complete record for appeal by returning
to Applicant the exhibits he had offered and which I had not admitted into evidence.
Further, the Appeal Board noted:
Where a document is offered as an exhibit by one of the
parties and discussed on the record, the document (or a
copy thereof) should be marked for identification by the
Judge and placed in the file of the case, even if the Judge
concludes that the document should not be admitted into
evidence. [Citations omitted.] Department of Defense rules
should be applied to documents that are classified or are
3
reasonably suspected of being in need of classification
review.
ISCR Case NO. 03-08257 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2007.)
To comply with the Appeal Board’s directions, I convened a new hearing for
Applicant on May 16, 2007.  The hearing convened on May 16, 2007, and produced a
transcript of 469 pages.  The Government  called no witnesses and introduced 14
Exhibits (Ex.), which were marked as Government’s Ex. 2-1 through 2-14. The
Government also introduced one document for administrative notice, which was marked
as Ex. 2-15. Applicant objected to the admission of Government Ex. 2-9 and Ex. 2-10.  I
admitted the two exhibits over Applicant’s objections.  I noted that the two exhibits
contained adverse e-mail communications, composed in 2000, from Applicant’s
workplace.  I advised the parties  that I would carefully assess how much weight I would
give to each exhibit.  Government Exs. 1 through  8 and 11 through 14 were admitted to
the record without objection.  Government Ex. 15 was also admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called five witnesses.  In addition,
Applicant introduced 24 Exhibits, which were marked Applicant’s Ex. A-2-1 through A-2-
24.  Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant’s Ex.
A-2-16 was an e-mail communication from a former co-worker of Applicant’s.   At the
conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open so that Applicant could submit a letter
from the co-worker in lieu of the e-mail.  On May 23, 2007, Applicant submitted, by
facsimile, the letter from the co-worker and asked that it be entered in the record as a
substitute for the e-mail previously entered as Ex. A-2-16.  Department Counsel did not
object to Applicant’s request. Accordingly, Applicant’s new Ex. A-2-16 was entered in
the record of the proceeding.  DOHA received the transcript of the proceeding on May
30, 2007. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the entire record in this case, including Applicant’s hearings of
February 24, 2006, March 8, 2006, and May 16, 2007, all exhibits entered into
evidence, and the testimony of  Applicant and all witnesses called,  I make the following
findings of fact:
The SOR in this case contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under
Guideline K, Security Violations, and four allegations under Guideline E, Personal
Conduct.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted eleven of the twelve allegations
but denied they were disqualifying conduct under Guidelines K and E.  He denied that
four allegations he admitted under Guideline K were security concerns under Guideline
E. He noted mitigating circumstances. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as
findings of fact.  
Applicant is 49 years old.  Since 2005, he has been employed as a senior
systems scientist by a government contractor.  He holds a bachelor of science degree in
electronics and engineering and a master of science degree in mechanical and
4
aerospace engineering. He is taking course work toward a Ph.D degree.  He has held a
security clearance since 1983.  (Tr. I, 12; Tr. III at 207, Ex. 1; Ex. C.)  
Applicant was married in 1982 and divorced in 1986.  He is the father of two adult
children.  (Ex. 1.) He has not remarried.  In 1988, Applicant was incarcerated for three
days by order of a state circuit court judge following a complaint by his ex-wife that
Applicant was harassing her. On the security clearance application (SF-86) he certified
on February 10, 2006, Applicant supplied information about his ex-wife and then added
the following additional comment: “Not an individual that I would recommend for a
position of trust. . . .” (Ex. 2-1, Ex. 2-14.)
From July 1986 to March 1987, Applicant was employed by a government
contractor (Employer A) as a systems analyst.  Between about February 6, 1987 and
March 4, 1987, Applicant was orally counseled or was issued deficiency/misconduct
notices approximately seven times. The counseling and deficiency notices related to
tardiness, poor work performance, failure to follow company procedures in working with
support staff, failure to meet production deadlines, and unprofessional demeanor. (Ex.
2-13.)
When Applicant worked for Employer A, he sought to organize a company-
sponsored volleyball team; in cooperation with Applicant, the company’s human
resources department provided him with a roster of employees who wanted to play on
the company’s team. The county where the team sought registration required that all
volleyball players certify with their signatures that they were residents of the county.
When Applicant obtained the list, there were several prospective players who had not
signed to verify their status as county residents. Without their permission, Applicant
signed the names of those employees on the roster. He then caused the roster to be
filed with the county. Thereafter,  he sought  reimbursement from the employer of the
filing fees he paid to the county to register the roster of players.  Employer A fired
Applicant on approximately March 9, 1987 for violating its business practices and ethics.
Applicant filed a claim for  unemployment benefits form his state of residence after he
was fired.  The state unemployment commission hearing examiner found that the nature
of Applicant’s separation from his employment disqualified him from receiving
unemployment benefits.  Applicant appealed. On appeal, the state employment
commission found that Applicant’s employer set forth a prima facie case of misconduct
and that the record supported a finding that Applicant “was discharged for unethical
conduct concerning his efforts to organize an employer/sponsored volleyball team.” (Ex.
2-11 at 3-5, Ex. 2-12; Tr. III, 340-348.)
Applicant objected to the inclusion of the information about his falsification of  the
co-workers’ signatures because it occurred 18 years ago.  He testified that he thought
off-duty conduct had some relation to on-duty conduct, but he characterized his on-duty
conduct as “sterling” and he asserted the employer did not specify how he had violated
the business practices and ethics code. ( Ex. N; Tr. II, 107.)  DOHA alleged in SOR ¶
2.c. that Applicant’s conduct in falsifying the signatures of his co-workers raised a
security concern under Guideline E.
5
Applicant certified an application for federal employment (SF-171) on August 23,
1989. Question 39 on the SF-171 asks an applicant for federal employment if he or she
has been fired from any job in the previous ten years. Applicant responded “yes” to
Question 39 and reported his firing from Employer A as “act[ing] inappropriately in
forming a company-sponsored sports team” and being accused by his employer “of
forging signatures for the roster.” He then added: “I believe the true reason for the
termination was due to my inability to control my then ex-wife and her harassment of me
at my place of work.”  At his hearing on remand on May 16, 2007, Applicant opined that
he was fired from his job by Employer A because the company mangers failed to
appreciate his work and found his engineering assessments “did not go along with their
geopolitical goal as a company.” (Ex.2-2 at 3, 12; Tr. III, 348-350.)
 
On the SF-171 he completed on August 23, 1989, Applicant reported he worked
as a project task leader for Employer B from January 1989 to April 1989.  He reported,
also in response to Question 39, that he left Employer B under threat of termination.  He
also reported that Employer B alleged he had violated his contract and withheld his last
paycheck. (Ex. 2-2 at 3-4.)
 
From 1996 to 2005, Applicant was employed by a government contractor as an
electrical engineer (Employer C).  He left that job under unfavorable circumstances.  On
the SF-86 he certified on February 10, 2006, Applicant stated he left his job as an
electrical engineer as the result of “change in employer requirements.  Employer felt I
was unable to fill any other jobs that they had at that time.”  (SF-86, signed by Applicant
on February 10, 2006, at 26.)  At his hearing on March 8, 2006,  Applicant explained he
left his job as an electrical engineer because an individual who reviewed his work did
not think he performed his job adequately.  (Tr. II, 103-104.)
In his work as a government contractor, Applicant was responsible for the
protection of classified information. During the period 1999 to 2000, he did not have
original or derivative classification authority.  He had recommended classification
authority.  He relied on agency guidance  for a determination of what was and was not
classified information. (Tr. III, 368-372.)
In March 1999, as a part of his regular duties, Applicant received a spreadsheet,
and it was his job to gather and compile unclassified information to go on the
spreadsheet format.  Once this was done, Applicant passed the spreadsheet to another
individual, who posted the spreadsheet on an unclassified web site.  In November 1999,
Applicant was responsible for updating the information on the spreadsheet. After he
updated the unclassified information by e-mail, officials in another office, who had
received the e-mail, informed his chain of command that a certain part of the
spreadsheet contained information that was classified.  Applicant’s supervisors did not
agree the information was classified, but they eventually acceded to the designation
proposed by the other office.  They removed the specified information from the
spreadsheet and the website, and it was labeled classified.  The military manager who
was responsible for providing Applicant with the spreadsheet information provided a
statement for the record, which reads, in pertinent part, as follows: “The information was
not deemed classified . . . when posted on the web or during the updating of the
spreadsheet; it became classified upon the subsequent ops-coordinated review.
The government alleged this fact in SOR 2.b. To corroborate the allegation, the government provided at Ex.4
2-4 at 4, a photocopied document identified as “Security Container Check Sheet” marked “Mar 00.”  It was not
possible to decipher whether an entry was or was not made on February 28, 2000.
The decision to decertify Applicant was made by a colonel who was chief of the division on the basis of5
information supplied to him by the major identified as the unit’s security manager. (Ex. 2-4.)
Ex. 2-8 identifies the author of the e-mails in Ex. 2-9 and Ex. 2-10 as the “[Deleted] security manager.” In6
testimony on remand, Applicant identified the individual as “ 1 of 30 officers that I dealt with and actually wasn’t
one of the more significant ones, so I can’t say it was a security issue and he brought it to my attention.”  (Tr.
III at 403.)  
6
[Applicant] had no way of knowing the information was classified.” (Ex. A-2-16; Ex. 2-8;
Tr. III, 241-248.)  In SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., DOHA alleged that Applicant was responsible
for security incidents arising from the information posted on the spreadsheet in March
1999 and November 1999.
On February 29, 2000, Applicant’s security manager sent an e-mail notification to
the chief military officer in Applicant’s chain of command notifying her that when
Applicant had closed the unit’s office the previous evening, he had  failed to initial the
outside form or to initial that he had performed the closing checklist.  Applicant stated4
his employer did not inform him of this incident.  On April 7, 2000 and April 9, 2000,
Applicant was responsible for securing his work facility.  On April 7, 2000, he failed to
properly secure the combination lock and to perform other steps to activate motor
sensors in the office.  On April 9, 2000, he also failed to secure the combination lock
and to pull a small pin attached to a lock on the door. Later, security inspectors found
the unsecured deadbolt locks.  Applicant learned the procedure for closing the office by
watching his co-workers perform the task.  He had not received formal training.  He did
not learn about pulling the pin on the lock until April 10, 2000.  Because Applicant’s
conduct was in violation of paragraphs 5-102 and 5-103 of the NISPOM,  he was
decertified to open and close the secure work area by himself after the incidents of April
7 and 9, 2000, until he had received further training.  He did not receive further training5
while assigned to that command, and he did not request further training from the
command. These three security incidents were alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., and 2.b.
(Tr. III, 292-300, 336-340, 385-390; 422-423, Ex. 2-4, Ex. 2-9, Ex. 2-15.)
On May 9, 2000, a major, identified as a security manager, observed Applicant at
a meeting and sent an e-mail to a senior officer in Applicant’s chain of command
expressing concern about Applicant’s handling of classified information.   The security6
manager stated that during the meeting, Applicant began to copy an unclassified file
from a classified laptop computer to move it to an unclassified projection computer,
without using secure copy. The security manager concluded that if Applicant had not
been stopped, the projection computer would have become classified. In addition, the
security manager observed that Applicant was using an unmarked disk to store the files
for the briefing and that he left the briefing room with out securing the classified laptop.,
Applicant’s failure to follow these required security procedures was alleged at ¶¶ 1. e(1),
1.e(2), and 1.e(3) of the SOR.  The allegations raised security concerns under ¶¶  4-102
(c), 8-102(c), 4-200, 1-200, 5-100, and 5-200 of the NISPOM. (Tr. II, 72-74; Tr. III, 302-
321, 392-403;  Ex. 10; Ex. 2-10, Ex. 2-15.) 
7
At his hearing on remand, Applicant stated the security manager’s allegations
were not brought to his attention.  He disputed the conclusion that plugging a classified
computer into a projector would have caused the projector to become classified.  He
observed that an unclassified disk put into an unclassified computer would not classify
the computer. He stated that it was unlikely that a disk would have been brought into the
briefing since the laptop computer used for the briefing was already loaded with the
information to be used at the briefing. He also clarified the chain of responsibility for
handling classified computers in his office (Tr. III, 302-320.)
In July 2000, Applicant attended a quadrennial defense briefing. Two military
officers managed the briefing. Applicant attended the briefing as a representative of his
work unit. Some of the material discussed at the briefing was classified. At the
conclusion of the meeting, Applicant wrote a summary of the matters discussed at the
meeting. Because he had attended many similar briefings, he felt confident he could
distinguish between the classified and non-classified material discussed at the meeting.
He sent the summary he had written to the two military officers who had conducted the
meeting and asked them to confirm that his summary was accurate. One of the officers
responded on a collateral matter within 24 hours, and Applicant interpreted his response
as a confirmation that his summary was accurate.  He did not hear immediately from the
second officer.  Acting on his interpretation that the first officer thought his summary
was accurate, Applicant sent his summary by e-mail on an unclassified network to about
20 people in his office. Soon after the e-mail was sent, it was determined that
Applicant’s summary contained classified information, and the classified information had
been sent over an unclassified system.  Applicant was removed from his job and
reassigned the next day to another office and another project. An investigation was
conducted .  Applicant’s conduct was categorized as a security deviation which resulted
in no damage to national security.  (Ex. 2-5; Tr.III, 321-333, 403-406, 416-421.)  This
security violation was alleged at ¶ 1.f. of the SOR and identified as a violation of
paragraph 5-403 of the NISPOM.
 
DOHA alleged that the security incidents alleged in ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and
1.e. of the SOR revealed questionable judgment, unreliability, and unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, conduct that created a security concern under
Guideline E of the Directive.  (The SOR at ¶ 2.a. alleges the Guideline K disqualifying
conduct is also disqualifying conduct under Guideline E.)  Applicant did not deny the
conduct, but he denied it was a security concern under Guideline E.  (Answer to SOR.)
Applicant submitted a letter of character reference from his first-line supervisor,
who had worked with him for approximately six months. The supervisor praised
Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and technical skill. (Ex. L-1.)  Applicant supplied additional
e-mail transmissions and letters of character reference from present and former co-
workers, all of whom attested to his trustworthiness.  (Ex. L-2 to L-8.; Ex. I, Q, .R, S, T,
U.)  He also supplied letters of appreciation he received from managers who evaluated
his work in 1991 and 1997. (Ex. J; Ex. M.)  At his hearing on remand, Applicant called
five witnesses.  Four of the witnesses had worked directly with the Applicant, and they
testified to his care in handling classified information.  All four witnesses also testified
that they had not seen the SOR and were not aware of the allegations in Applicant’s
case.  (Tr. 97-99, 104, 114-117, 126-127, 137-140, 145-146, 157-161, 170.)    
8
I take administrative notice of the following sections of the National Security
Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), DoD 5220.22-M, dated January 1995: ¶¶ 5-403,
5-102, 5-103, 4-102(c), 8–102(c), 4-200, 1-200, 5-100, 5-200.
Policies
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to .
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has restricted eligibility for
access to classified information to United States citizens “whose personal and
professional history affirmatively indicates loyalty to the United States, strength of
character, trustworthiness, honesty, reliability, discretion, and sound judgment, as well
as freedom from conflicting allegiances and potential for coercion, and willingness and
ability to abide by regulations governing the use, handling, and protection of classified
information.”  Exec. Or. 12968, Access to Classified Information § 3.1(b) (Aug. 4, 1995).
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the security
guidelines contained in the Directive.  
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personal security guidelines, as well as the
disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline.  In
evaluating the security worthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also
assess the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive.  The decision to
deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.  It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in
the personal or professional history of the applicant that disqualify, or may disqualify,
the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.  See Egan, 484
U.S. at 531.  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection between proven
conduct under any of the disqualifying conditions listed in the guidelines and an
applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2,
1996).  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
facts.  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); see Directive ¶ E3.1.15.
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  ISCR Case No.
01-20700 at 3.
9
Analysis
Guideline K - Security Violations 
In the SOR, DOHA alleged under Guideline K of the Directive that Applicant
failed to comply with security regulations on six occasions.  DOHA further alleged that
Applicant’s non-compliance resulted in eight security incidents which violated nine
provisions of the NISPOM. (See NISPOM ¶¶ 1-200,  4-102(c), 4-200, 5-100, 5-102, 5-
103, 5-200, 5-403, and 8-102(c).)  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the
eight security incidents specified in the SOR at ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.  Noncompliance with
security regulations raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, willingness, and
ability to safeguard classified information.  E2.A11.1.1. 
Under the adjudicative Guideline K applicable in this case, security concerns are
raised and could be disqualifying when there is an unauthorized disclosure of classified
information (E2.A11.1.2.1) and when an applicant is responsible for violations that are
deliberate or multiple or due to negligence. (E2.A11.1.2.2.)
Applicant’s everyday work conditions as a government contractor required using
and protecting classified information.  Because they identify possible unauthorized and
deliberate or negligent disclosures of classified information,  SOR allegations 1.a., 1.b.,
and 1.f. raise security concerns under Disqualifying Condition (DC) E2.A11.1.2.1 and
DC E2.A11.1.2.2.  At his hearing on remand, Applicant provided credible information
establishing that he placed unclassified information on a spreadsheet that was later
transmitted to an unclassified web site in March 1999. He also provided credible
information that the same information was not classified when he updated the
spreadsheet in November 1999 and e-mailed it via an unclassified web site to others
authorized to receive it. He also provided credible information to establish that some of
the information on the spreadsheet was later upgraded to classified as the result of an
internal review. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant rebutted SOR allegations 1.a. and
1.b. and demonstrated that his actions as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. were not in
violation of paragraph 5-403 of the NISPOM.
SOR allegation 1.f. also raises security concerns under DC E2.A11.1.2.1. and
DC E2.A11.1.2.2.  At his remand hearing, Applicant testified that in July 2000, he wrote
a summary of matters discussed at a quadrennial defense briefing and felt confident
that his summary did not contain classified information. He sent his summary to the two
military officers who were responsible for the meeting. He heard back from one officer,
and he interpreted the officer’s response as clearance to send his summary as an
unclassified document.  Applicant sent his summary as an unclassified e-mail document
over an unclassified network. The e-mail summary was reviewed and determined to
contain classified information.  Applicant was removed from his position and assigned to
another office and another project. An investigation was conducted and Applicant’s
conduct was deemed to be a security deviation which resulted in no damage to national
security. 
Applicant’s actions resulted in the unauthorized disclosure of classified
information. While his unauthorized disclosure of classified information was not
10
deliberate, it appears to have been caused by negligence consequent to misplaced
confidence in his ability to distinguish classified and unclassified information. Applicant
possessed neither original nor derivative classification authority. In creating his
summary he had a duty to request clarification regarding the information in the
summary and whether it was classified or unclassified.  He failed to exercise that duty
but relied on assumptions that his past methods of inquiry for clarification were sufficient
to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of classified information in this instance.  His
assumption that one of the two officers had provided clearance for the release of his
summary was not correct.  
We turn to an examination of applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline K.
An applicant may mitigate security violation concerns if he shows the security violations
were inadvertent ¶ E2.A11.1.3.1; isolated or infrequent ¶ E2.A11.1.3.2.;due to improper
or inadequate training ¶ E2.A11.1.3.3.; or if the individual demonstrates a positive
attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities ¶ E2.A11.1.3.4. 
Applicant’s security violation appears to have occurred not through inadvertence
but  through a failure to exercise the due care required of a person entrusted with the
responsibility for working with and protecting classified information.  (See NISPOM, 1-
200, 5-100, and 5-200.)  His violation was not isolated or infrequent, but occurred within
a context of inattentiveness that suggests a habit or pattern of behavior.  Accordingly,
mitigating conditions E2.A11.1.3.1 and E2.A11.1.3.2 do not apply to Applicant’s case.
I also conclude that the security violation alleged at SOR 1.f. did not occur as the
result of improper or inadequate training, and, therefore, mitigating condition
E2.A11.1.3.3 is inapplicable.  
Applicant is a highly trained engineer whose livelihood is premised on work
requiring him to protect classified documents and information. Four of Applicant’s
witnesses testified to his present carefulness in protecting classified information. None
of the witnesses was aware of Applicant’s previous security incidents. Applicant
defended his previous conduct that led to the security incident alleged at SOR 1.f., thus
making it difficult to ascertain whether he had developed a specific plan for avoiding
future security violations.  Accordingly, I conclude that mitigating condition E2.A11.1.3.4.
applies only in part.
SOR allegations 1.c. and 1.d. specify two incidents, one on April 7, 2000 and one
on April 9, 2000, when Applicant failed to close his office by properly securing a
combination lock and performing other steps to activate motor sensors in the office.
When he attempted to close the office on April 9, 2000, he also failed to secure the
combination lock and to set a small pin attached to the lock on the door.  Applicant’s
failure to lock up his secure facility was reported to his security manager. After these
incidents were reported, Applicant was decertified to open and close the secure work
area by himself  until he received remedial training.  His command did not provide the
remedial training, nor did Applicant request it.
At his remand hearing, Applicant testified credibly that, prior to the security
incidents, he had never received formal training in locking up his secure facility, and he
11
had learned to lock up by watching other employees carry out the task. He
acknowledged he didn’t know about setting the pin on the lock.
Applicant’s failure on two occasions to lock up his work facility securely raises a
security concern under DC E2.A11.1.2.2.  I conclude that this conduct was inadvertent
and due to improper or inadequate training.  Accordingly, mitigating conditions
E2.A11.1.3.1 and E2.A11.1.3.3. apply.
On May 9, 2000, Applicant’s security manager sent an e-mail to a senior military
official describing his concern about Applicant’s handling of classified information.  The
contents of this e-mail constitute SOR allegations 1.e(1), 1.e(2), and 1.e(3). Allegation
1.e(1) states that Applicant started to copy an unclassified computer file from a
classified laptop to an unclassified projection computer without using secure copy.
Allegation 1.e(2) states that Applicant used an unmarked disk to store files for the
briefing. Allegation 1.e(3) states that Applicant failed to secure a classified laptop
computer at the end of the meeting.
The record is silent regarding the response of the senior official to the security
manager’s e-mail allegations. Nothing in the record suggests that the allegations in the
security manager’s e-mail were investigated or brought to Applicant’s attention at the
time they allegedly occurred.  Nothing in the record corroborates the allegations in the
security manager’s e-mail. I conclude the evidence has very little weight in establishing
that Applicant is responsible for the security violations alleged.  Additionally, Applicant
provided credible testimony refuting the allegations. Accordingly, I conclude SOR
allegations 1.e(1), 1.e(2), and 1.e(3) for Applicant. 
 
 Guideline E - Personal Conduct
In the SOR, DOHA alleged  that the Guideline K security incidents alleged at ¶¶
1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e. constituted security concerns under Guideline E of the
Directive  (¶ 2.a.); that on February 29, 2000, when Applicant closed the office, he failed
to initial the security checklist to show it had been carried out, and he did not initial the
outside form in the proper location (¶ 2.b.); that in March 1987, he was fired for
misconduct for violating his employer’s code of business practices and ethics by
falsifying the signatures of individuals on a roster for a company-sponsored volleyball
team in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses relating to registering the team (¶
3.c.); and that from February 6, 1987 to March 4, 1987 he was either orally counseled or
given written employee deficiency/misconduct notices for being late for work, being late
on projects, producing poor quality work, or for having an unprofessional attitude. (¶
4.d.)
Guideline E conduct raises security concerns because it involves questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations and could indicate that an applicant may not properly
safeguard classified information.  Directive ¶ E2.A5.l.l. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied allegation 2(a) because he had
already addressed the allegations enumerated there as security violations under  ¶¶
DC E2.A5.1.2.1 reads: “Reliable, unfavorable information provided by associates, employers, coworkers,7
neighbors, and other acquaintances.”  DC E2.A5.1.2.4. reads: “Personal conduct or concealment of
information that increases an individual’s vulnerability to coercion, exploitation or duress, such as engaging
in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s professional, or community standing or render the person
susceptible to blackmail.”
12
1.a. through 1.e.   He admitted allegation 2(b) but denied it was of security significance
under Guideline E.  He also admitted allegations 2(c) and 2(d).
Allegation 2(b) states that Applicant failed to follow required procedures for
closing his office by initialing a security checklist on February 29, 2000.  The
government’s evidence in support of allegation 2(b) is barely legible and fails to
corroborate the allegation.  I conclude allegation 2(b) for Applicant.
Allegation 2(a) enumerates the security violations alleged at SOR 1(a), 1(b), 1(c),
1(d) and 1(e) and alleges that those facts raise personal conduct concerns about
Applicant’s judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Allegations
2(c) and 2(d) allege personal conduct that raises concerns about Applicant’s judgment,
trustworthiness, reliability, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.
Applicant’s conduct raises security concerns under Guideline E Disqualifying Conditions
(DC) E2.A5.1.2.1. and DC E2.A5.1.2.4.   Applicant’s personal conduct in failing to7
acknowledge the conduct that led to his firing from Company A increases his
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress.
We turn to an examination of possible Mitigating Conditions (MC) under the
Guideline.  Because Applicant’s former employer and associates provided information
about his unprofessional conduct that was substantiated and pertinent to a
determination of his judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability, MC E2.A5.1.3.1 is
inapplicable. 
The conduct alleged in ¶ 2(a) occurred in 1999 and 2000, but it demonstrated an
on-going pattern of inattentiveness and failure to follow rules and regulations for
protecting classified information. The conduct alleged in ¶¶  2(c) and 2(d) occurred
almost 20 years ago, in 1987.  However, in his hearings, Applicant continued to justify
his conduct in 1987 and did not appear to understand why his employer fired him for
falsifying a roster by signing the names of individuals who did not meet the residency
requirement of the county in which the company-sponsored team would play. Further,
Applicant presented the falsified roster to his employer for reimbursement of filing fees.
Applicant offered two other reasons for his firing.  In 1989, two years after he was fired,
he opined that he was fired because his ex-wife was harassing him at work.  In 2007, at
his hearing on remand, he speculated that the company managers fired him in 1987
because his engineering assessments “did not go along with [the company’s]
geopolitical goal as a company.”  Applicant’s attempts to justify his actions that gave
rise to his termination from Company A suggest that he has not taken positive steps to
come to terms with his conduct, a situation that continues to make him vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  Accordingly, I conclude that MC E2.A5.1.2.4. is not
applicable.
13
Whole Person Analysis
In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each
guideline, an administrative judge must thoroughly consider and review of all available
reliable information about the appellant, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, to
arrive at a balanced decision.  Enclosure 2, ¶ E2.2.1 of the Adjudicative Guidelines
describes this process of scrutiny and evaluation as “the whole person concept.”  The
factors to be considered in a whole person analysis include the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; the frequency and recency of the conduct; the individual’s
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the voluntariness of participation; the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; the
motivation for the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and the likelihood for continuation or recurrence.
Applicant completed a SF-171 in August 1989. He completed a SF-86 in
December 1998 and another SF-86 in February 2006. These documents reveal that
Applicant had a contentious relationship with his ex-wife and was incarcerated for three
days in 1988 for harassing her.  Eighteen years later, in 2006, when he completed his
SF-86, he added a line stating that he would not recommend his former wife for a
position of trust, an observation that seemed beside the point when added to his
security clearance application.  Applicant’s documents also show he was fired from jobs
or left under threat of termination in 1987 (Employer A), 1989 (Employer B), and 2005
(Employer C). Applicant provided several different reasons for his job terminations,
suggesting he had not assessed or come to terms with the conduct that led to the
terminations. He explained that his firings occurred because his work was not
appreciated or because individuals who reviewed his work did not think he performed
his job adequately.  He also speculated he was fired by Employer A in 1987 because his
wife was harassing him at work.  He did not appear to accept the determination that
Employer A fired him for an ethics violation, even when the state unemployment
commission denied him benefits after finding he had been fired for violating his
employer’s code of business and ethical conduct.  
Applicant’s personal conduct that led to the allegations of security violations
suggests a pattern of inattention to rules and procedures.  His lack of attention to the
details of protecting classified information caused him to take actions that raised
security concerns under Guideline K. His present defense of his past unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations raises security concerns under Guideline E.
In ISCR Case No. 98-0761 at 3 (Dec. 27, 1999), DOHA’s Appeal Board states
that an administrative judge, in deciding an applicant’s security worthiness, “must
consider the record as a whole (Directive Section F.3.) and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.” I have
considered the record as a whole and have evaluated Applicant’s conduct under the
whole person concept of the Directive.  I conclude that the favorable evidence does not
outweigh the unfavorable evidence and that Applicant has not demonstrated that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
14
Formal Findings
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline K: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e(1): For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e(2): For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e(3): For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant
Paragraph 2.  Guideline E:   Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.(a):  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.(b):  For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.(c):  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.(d):  Against Applicant
Decision
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Clearance is denied.
Joan Caton Anthony
Administrative Judge
