1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 03-21428
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 18, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on November 9, 2005.  On September 25, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a
clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 5, 2007, and
requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on November 13, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued on November
16, 2007, scheduling the hearing for December 4, 2007.  At the hearing the Government
2
presented five exhibits.  The Applicant presented no exhibits, nor called any witnesses.
He did testify on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on December
14, 2007.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 62 years old and divorced.  He has a Bachelors Degree in Math
and Computer Science.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Software
Engineer, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline D - Sexual Behavior).  
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because his sexual behavior involved a criminal offense, is indicative of a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or may subject
the individual to undue influence or coercion, or reflects lack of judgment or discretion.  
The Applicant admits to each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  He admits that he is a sexual pervert and believes that he is now on the road
to recovery.  
Since the age of fourteen, when he was introduced to this conduct by a junior
high school friend, the Applicant has engaged in perverted sexual activity, at times
illegal and/or immoral and offensive to others.  From 1959, at fourteen years of age,
until at least 2001, at the age of 56, the Applicant rubbed his penis, at times unexposed
and other times fully exposed, on numerous occasions against unsuspecting female’s
buttocks.  The Applicant explained that this was always a voluntary act on his part and
he engaged in this conduct about once a month on average for excitement.  He would
go to crowded places and target women that he felt attracted to.  
On one occasion, the Applicant was at a basketball game with his daughter when
he began rubbing his penis on a woman in the crowd.  He does not believe his daughter
realized what he was doing.    
In 1972, the Applicant began working for a defense contractor, and received his
first security clearance in 1975.  He has held a security clearance from the Department
of Defense since then.
From 1965 to 1972, on numerous occasions, the Applicant has looked up
women’s dresses without their knowledge.  Except for the period between 1968 and
1969 when the Applicant was drafted in the Army, he would crawl under cubicles in his
college library to look between girl’s legs at school.    
3
In 1972, when the Applicant was no longer a student at that university, he
returned to the school library to look up girl’s dresses.  On this occasion, he was
arrested and charged with Trespassing, barred from the campus, and required to serve
a probationary period.  (See Government Exhibit 2).      
From 1965 through at least 1972, the Applicant has masturbated and rubbed his
penis in public places to arouse himself.  The Applicant explained that he would sit next
to a woman and use a book to rub his penis.  On some occasions he would arouse
himself to the point of ejaculation.  
On numerous other occasions, the Applicant explained that after making eye
contact with an attractive woman, he licks his lips in full view of an attractive woman
because he finds it to be sexually arousing.  He has continued this activity until at least
2004.    
In the early 1990's, the Applicant was caught rubbing his unexposed penis
against a woman at the craps table at a casino in Las Vegas, Nevada.  He was detained
by security and asked to leave and never return to the casino.  The Applicant admitted
that he engaged in this conduct on many other occasions and was not caught.  He
explained that he engaged in this conduct for the excitement of it all.  (See Government
Exhibit 2).
The Applicant was arrested on June 12, 1994, and charged with (1) Lewd or
Lascivious Acts with a Child 14 or 15 years old, (2) Sexual Battery, and (3) Indecent
Exposure.  He testified that this conduct occurred as he was exiting a movie theater
when he had first rubbed his exposed penis on a mother and then on her child.  He
explained that at that time, he was trying to get aroused.  The Applicant was convicted
of all three charges and sentenced to serve 60 days in jail (served during 29 1/2
weekends), pay restitution to the victim, undergo counseling and was placed on three
years of supervised probation.  (See Government Exhibits 3, 4 and 5).  As set forth
below, the Applicant violated the terms of this probation and was sentenced to serve
120 days in jail, which was stayed on three conditions: 1) the successful completion of
counseling with a Clinical Psychologist, 2) that he keep a sponsor in the sexual
counseling program, and 3) that he have no further violation.   
A year later, and in violation of his earlier probation, on July 9, 1995, the
Applicant was charged with (1) Sexual Battery, and (2) Disorderly Conduct.  This time
he was mingling in a crowd near some street performers and rubbed himself up against
a woman.  An undercover police officer arrested him.  He was found guilty of Count 1
and sentenced to serve 30 days in the county jail, to serve 36 months on probation, pay
$100.00 restitution and was required to under go counseling and attend 90 Sexual
Compulsives Anonymous meetings within 120 days.  Since 1997, the Applicant has
been required to register as a Sexual Offender in the State of California.  (See
Government Exhibit 3).       
 
4
Following his arrests in 1994, and 1995, the Applicant failed to report this
adverse information to his company security officer.  He waited until his five year
security clearance update to disclose the information.
The Applicant testified that even though he is ashamed of this sexual
misconduct, he would not jeopardize the country’s security if someone tried to use the
information against him.  (Tr. p. 80).  He stated that he is on the road to recovery from
his sexual perversions.  He now avoids crowded environments or public places. 
The Applicant’s daughters, family and business associates are unaware of his
sexual perversions and criminal sexual activities and he does not want them to know
about it.  His daughter and grand daughter currently live with him.  It is very stressful to
the Applicant and he constantly worries that someone may find out that he is a
registered sexual offender.  (Tr. p. 85).  
The Applicant was drafted into the Army during the Viet Nam war and served our
country in the 25  Infantry Division for 22 months.  He served in Viet Nam for one year.th
He received the Silver Star, a very prestigious award given only to those engaged in
combat with the enemy. 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
(Guideline D (Sexual Behavior)
12. The Concern.  Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  No adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be
raise solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
13 (a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual was
prosecuted;
5
13(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that
the person is unable to stop to that may be symptomatic of a personality disorder; 
13(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress;
13(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or
judgment.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
6
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . .  shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
Analysis
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and
factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this
Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its case as to all
allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's questionable sexual behavior has a direct
and negative impact on his suitability for access to classified information.  
The Applicant is an admitted sexual pervert who has engaged in inappropriate
sexual behavior from 1959 to at least 2004.   At times his conduct was criminal, as
evidenced by his two arrests in 1994 and 1995.  On numerous other occasions, his
sexual misconduct was immoral and offensive.  He is a registered sex offender.  He has
received counseling and psychiatric treatment for his sexual perversions.  He believes
that he is in recovery.  However, he does not want anyone to know about his sexual
perversions and has kept it a secret from his family, friends and coworkers.  Following
his arrests, he did not inform his company security officer of this adverse information.
Considering this evidence in totality, this demonstrates a pattern of inappropriate sexual
behavior and high risk conduct that was careless, lacked discretion and good judgment
and could subject him to pressure, coercion and/or blackmail, which in turn could
subject the Government to a security risk.  
Th Applicant’s high risk behavior places him in a vulnerable position to be
susceptible to pressure, coercion and/or blackmail.  He engaged in these activities after
7
having been granted a Security Clearance in 1975.  His questionable judgment and lack
of discretion occurred as recently as 2004, just three years ago.  The Applicant states
that since 2001, he has taken measures to prevent his impulsive or planned sexual
perverted activities by avoiding crowded and public places.  However, this pattern of
high risk behavior is unacceptable while holding a security clearance and entrusted with
the national secrets.  The risk is great that he may fall prey to exploitation, coercion or
duress.  Under Guideline D, Disqualifying Conditions 13 (a), “sexual behavior of a
criminal nature, whether or not the individual was prosecuted;” 13(b), “a pattern of
compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person is unable to
stop to that may be symptomatic of a personality disorder;” 13(c), “sexual behavior that
causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress;” and 13(d),
“sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment,”
apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are even remotely applicable.  The Applicant
has not met his burden of demonstrating that his sexual behavior does not raise a
security concern, and Guideline D is found against the Applicant.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline D of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline D.
Formal Findings
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant
Conclusions
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
____________________________
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
