 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 06-01680 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (eQIP)1 on August 8, 
2005. On August 22, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on November 13, 2007. 
On November 14, 2007, Department Counsel telephonically contacted Applicant at his 
place of work in Australia to propose hearing dates. On that day, Applicant requested 
1  Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing. 
 
2  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
his hearing be conducted via video teleconference (VTC) and agreed to a hearing date 
of December 12, 2007 (Tr. 14-16). DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 12, 
2007. I convened the hearing at 4:00 P.M., on December 12, 2007, Eastern Standard 
Time (8:00 A.M. on December 13, 2007, Australia time). The government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 19, which were received without objection.  
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2 post-
hearing, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open until January 10, 2008, to submit additional matters. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 4, 2008. The record closed on January 10, 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
On November 14, 2007, Applicant agreed to a hearing via VTC on December 12, 
2007. Because of the uncertainty concerning the availability of the VTC facility in 
Australia, and confusion due to the time difference, the hearing notice was not issued 
until December 12, 2007. At the hearing, I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 
of the Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant stated he was ready to 
proceed, that he had sufficient time to prepare for his hearing, and affirmatively waived 
his right to 15 days notice. (Tr. 14-16.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 17, 2007, Applicant admitted all 
SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old systems engineer. In December 1996, he completed 
his first bachelor’s degree in creative writing. In May 2002, he completed his second 
bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. He completed a master’s degree in 
systems engineering in December 2005 (Tr. 5). He has never been married, and has no 
children. 
 
In June 2002, Applicant began working for a defense contractor, and shortly 
thereafter, he was granted access to classified information at the secret level. He has 
held access to classified information since then (Tr. 6). In 2005, he submitted a security 
clearance application requesting an upgrade of his access to classified information to 
the top secret level. He has worked for his current employer for approximately one year 
(Tr. 32). There is no evidence that Applicant has ever compromised classified 
information or that he has failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the 
protection of classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 
The Government’s security concerns in this case arose out of Applicant’s 1994 
conviction for reckless homicide and seven speeding tickets he has accumulated since 
then. In November 1993, Applicant and his girlfriend were riding a motorcycle on his 
college campus. He was speeding, driving recklessly, and his brakes failed at a four-
way stop. They were involved in a motorcycle accident and Applicant’s girlfriend died as 
a result of the accident. He was charged with Reckless Homicide, Involuntary 
Manslaughter, and Criminal Recklessness Resulting in Serious Bodily Injury. The last 
two charges were dismissed by the prosecutor, apparently as a result of a pre-trial 
agreement. 
 
In May 1994, Applicant was convicted of Reckless Homicide, a Class C felony in 
his state (GE 7). On June 29, 1994, Applicant  was sentenced to “the county jail, with 
the recommendation of work release, for a period of two years, with good time credit, to 
be followed by two years of supervised probation on condition that he serve two years 
of home detention” (GE 8).3 The Court gave Applicant a credit of one day for time spent 
in pre-trial confinement while the charges were pending (GE 8).   
 
On Wednesday, July 6, 1994, Applicant reported to the county jail and began 
serving his sentence in the Work Release Program (GE 8, Tr. 36). While on work 
release, Applicant was allowed to leave the county jail only to attend work and school. 
Applicant was required to sign in and out of the jail; he was subject to random searches, 
drug testing, and his whereabouts in and out of jail were constantly monitored by jail 
personnel to ensure his compliance with the terms of the program. When Applicant was 
not attending authorized work or school, he was required to be in the county jail (Tr. 36-
44). 
 
Applicant contended he was released from the Work Release Program on July 3, 
1995, that he was given two days credit for time spent in jail in pre-trial confinement, 
and that his home detention should not be considered confinement for purposes of AG 
¶ 31(f) (10 U.S.C. 986). Applicant believed he served less than 365 days in 
confinement. 
 
The Government contended Applicant served on work release from July 6, 1994 
to at least August 18, 1995. In support of her position, Department Counsel relied 
primarily on Applicant’s Petition for Extension of Time in Which to Return to Work 
Release Program (GE 11) and the Court Order granting the petition (GE 12), both of 
which show Applicant was required to return to the county jail on April 18, 1995, to 
complete the work release portion of his sentence.4 
3  The Court considered as aggravating factors that Applicant had a prior conviction for 
conversion, was convicted in September 1993 for operating a motorcycle 40 m.p.h. in a 20 m.p.h. zone, 
and that he failed to stop and yield to a police officer and disregarded multiple traffic signs during the 
Reckless Homicide offense (GE 8). 
 
4  Applicant’s Petition for Modification of Sentence (GE 14) also indicates Applicant served at 
least one year on work release. 
  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 
After careful consideration of all the evidence, I find Applicant was released from 
the Work Release Program on July 3, 1995. The “Adult Probation Data” document 
enclosed in AE 1 shows Applicant was released from the Work Release Program on 
July 3, 1995. This finding is corroborated by the counselor’s comments journal for July 
6, 1995, indicating: “Released from WR completing 362 days” (enclosed in AE 1). 
Additionally, two other documents support this finding: (1) a July 6, 1995, letter from the 
Work Release Director to the Court indicating Applicant had successfully completed 362 
days on the program as of July 3, 1995 (GE 10); and, (2) a Court order, apparently 
prepared by Applicant’s attorney for the Court’s approval/signature, and attached to 
Applicant’s Petition for Permission to Travel (AE 2).5 Paragraph 1 of the Court Order 
states: “Applicant will complete the work release portion of his sentence . . . on July 3, 
1995.”   
 
To summarize my findings, Applicant began serving his sentence in the Work 
Release Program on Wednesday, July 6, 1994, and he was released on Monday, July 
3, 1995. Applicant was incarcerated for a total of 364 days – which include the 363 days 
served on work release, plus one day of credit he received for time spent in pre-trial 
confinement. 
 
Applicant began serving home detention on August 23, 1995. The Court released 
him from home detention on April 25, 1996, but kept him on supervised probation (GE 
13, 14, 16). While on home detention, Applicant was confined to his home at all times, 
except when specifically authorized by the Court to attend activities such as work, 
school, and religious services (GE 8). I find Applicant’s home detention was not 
tantamount to incarceration because he was not institutionalized and the only condition 
on his liberty was that he had to remain in his home. 
 
Applicant has been convicted for speeding seven times since his 1993 accident, 
to wit: July 1996, February 1997, August 1998, October 2000, September 2002, May 
2003, and July 2004. On the last three occasions his speed exceeded the speed limit by 
at least 10 miles per hour (GE 19). Applicant explained these last three violations 
occurred on highways with speed limits of 65 miles per hour, and that his speed did not 
exceed the limit by more than 10 miles per hour (Tr. 68).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his 1993 accident. He 
noted he was young and immature (19 years old) at the time, but that there were no 
drugs or alcohol involved. He disclosed his 1994 conviction on his 2002 and 2005 
security clearance applications. He has had access to classified information since 2002 
with no security violations or breach of trust. He averred that except for his speeding 
tickets, he has maintained a clean record since 1994. 
 
5  Applicant presented only the first page of the Court Order; however, other documents (GE 11 
and 12) show the Court granted the petition to travel. 
  
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant testified he has had an impeccable record working for defense 
contractors providing support to the military in high visibility projects. There is no 
evidence to dispute he is a valued employee with good work performance. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.6 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”7 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
6  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
7  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Applicant was convicted in 1994 for reckless homicide, he was sentenced to jail 
for a period of two years, albeit with a recommendation of work release, and he actually 
served his incarceration on a work release program for a period of 364 days. While on 
work release, he was subject to significant conditions on liberty equivalent to 
confinement, i.e., he was not allowed to leave jail unless specifically authorized to do so 
to attend work or school, he remained in jail at night and during the weekends, and he 
was subject to constant monitoring, in and out of jail, as well as unannounced searches 
and drug testing. His time on work release is considered imprisonment for purposes of 
calculating the length of his incarceration.8  
 
 Disqualifying Condition (DC) ¶ 31(a): “a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses” applies. DC ¶ 31(f): “conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-
martial of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year,” does not apply 
because Applicant was incarcerated for less than a year.  
 
 AG & 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31(a). After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), I 
find that AG 32(a) and AG 32(d) partially apply – his criminal behavior is temporally 
remote and there is no evidence of additional criminal activity, he completed college and 
advance education, and he has been employed since 2002 by defense contractors 
8  See U.S. v. Ruffin, 40 F.3d 1296 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (a sentence to imprisonment for one year with 
work release, where appellant was imprisoned on weekends from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily, is a 
sentence of incarceration); and U.S. v. Timbrook, 290 F.3d 957 (7th Cir. 2002) (a sentence of work 
release in a county jail was a sentence of imprisonment for purposes of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines 
where the appellant had been sentenced to probation with a condition work release with incarceration in 
the country jail when he was not at work).  
 
7 
 
 
having access to classified information without evidence of any security violation. 
Additionally, Applicant is now a mature 33-year-old man with substantial responsibilities 
at work. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s seven speeding violations since his 1993 fatal 
traffic accident cast serious doubts about his judgment, reliability, and willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations. Furthermore, his speeding violations show 
Applicant has not learned from his mistakes, that his questionable behavior is likely to 
recur, and such behavior cast doubts on his rehabilitation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG & 15.  
 
 Since the 1993 fatal traffic accident, Applicant has accumulated seven speeding 
violations. His speeding, when considered in conjunction with the circumstances that 
caused his 1993 accident (speeding and reckless driving), cast serious doubt about his 
judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. His 
behavior triggers the applicability of AG ¶ 16(d): “credible adverse information that is not 
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rules violations.” 
 
  AG & 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it partially 
applies since the traffic violations are not serious offenses. However, his seven 
speeding violations since his 1994 conviction forms a pattern of frequent behavior that 
is likely to recur, shows he has not learned from his past mistake, and casts doubts on 
his reliability, good judgment, and ability to comply with laws, rules and regulations. AG 
¶ 17(d) is not applicable because Applicant has failed to change the behavior that 
contributed to his 1994 conviction. His seven speeding violations show he has failed to 
take positive steps to prevent recurrence of his past behavior. They also show 
Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to learn from his mistakes, and demonstrate his 
poor judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
8 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well educated 
man. Since 1994, he has been successful as a student and at work. He has held access 
to classified information at the secret level for approximately 4 years. There is no 
evidence to show Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified information. 
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in his case, Applicant’s 1994 
conviction, coupled with his seven speeding violations create doubts as to his judgment, 
reliability, and ability to comply with laws, rules and regulations. I find Applicant’s recent 
speeding tickets undercut his claims of successful rehabilitation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
