                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 06-19522 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines D (Sexual 
Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86).1 On January 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
1Item 4 (Security Clearance Application, dated May 31, 2005). For convenience, the security 
clearance application in this decision will be called an SF 86. There is no allegation of falsification of the 
2005 SF 86.   
 
2Item I (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Jan. 11, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 revoked. 
                                                          
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
 
In an answer dated March 5, 2007, and received at DOHA on March 7, 2007, 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to have his case decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing.4 A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated November 2, 2007, was provided to him on November 16, 2007, and he 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.5 Submissions were due by December 16, 2007.6 Applicant 
did not provide any submissions.  The case was assigned to me on January 28, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted most of the allegations in 
his response to the SOR. His response to the SOR also provided mitigating information 
concerning the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 58 years old (Item 4). He married his current spouse in 1971 (Item 
4).  He has three grown children (Item 4).   
 
On December 6, 2002, Applicant received a security letter concerning his 
solicitation of prostitutes and “sexual behavior of a public nature (masturbation in the 
office)” (Item 6 at 1). The 2002 security letter advised Applicant of the pertinent 
Guideline D (sexual behavior) and Guideline J (criminal conduct) disqualifying 
conditions (Id.). Applicant signed a letter acknowledging his “obligation to comply with 
U.S. Government policies regarding sexual behavior and criminal conduct” for continued 
3On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
4Item 2 (Applicant’s response to SOR, notarized on Mar. 5, 2007).  
 
5Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Nov. 5, 2007, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated Nov. 16, 2007.  
 
6Id. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt 
to submit information.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
access to classified information (Item 6 at 2).  The 2002 security letter warned 
Applicant, “Any future adverse issues or incidents related to sexual behavior and 
criminal conduct will raise serious concerns regarding continued access and will be 
resolved through the revocation of your access” (Id. at 2).   
 
Between 1977 and October 2006, Applicant used the services of prostitutes on 
average about six to eight times per year.7 He used prostitution services in various 
locations including their residences, hotels, his residence and a car (Id. at 2). The 
sexual acts procured include sodomy, masturbation and sexual intercourse (Id. at 2).  
Applicant paid the prostitutes on average about $200-$300 for each session (Id. at 2).  
He also paid prostitutes to engage in sexual acts with him in Washington D.C. on 
multiple occasions (Id. at 3). 
 
In the last six to eight years, Applicant “engaged in sexual acts [oral sex and 
masturbation] with men he met at various adult bookstores and adult arcades” in Texas 
two or three times per year (Id. at 4-5).8 Applicant noted, “[t]he arcades either have 
locked private rooms and/or [locked] viewing booths” (Id. at 4). “There [were] also 
occasions at the arcades when the booths had viewing areas.  People could watch you 
engage[] in sexual activity or masturbating, or [Applicant] could watch them.” (Id. at. 5).  
 
Primarily in the early 1990’s and up to about 1999, Applicant masturbated in his 
employer’s restroom about once a month (Id. at 5). Prior to masturbating in the 
restroom, he insured no one was in the restroom (Id. at 5). Once or twice in the early 
1990s, he masturbated while in an office at his employer’s place of business, but he 
insured the door was locked (Id. at. 6). In the 1980’s, he masturbated several times 
while driving on an interstate highway (Id. at 6). Other than adult bookstores and 
arcades, he did not masturbate in any other public areas (Id. at 6).  
 
Applicant stated, “I fully understand that much of my actions described above are 
criminal in nature and a violation of the law” (Id. at 6). He described the sexual contacts 
as impersonal, and not involving feelings of love and/or commitment (Id. at 6).  He was 
never arrested or charged with violating indecency laws or soliciting prostitution (Id. at 
6).  His payments for sexual acts did not result in financial problems (Id. at 6).  He did 
not receive therapy or treatment for sexual behavior (Id. at 7).   
 
Applicant promised in his DSS interview on December 11, 2006 that he would 
make every effort to refrain from sexual acts outside of marriage and with prostitutes 
while holding a security clearance (Id. at 7). However, he admitted that he could not 
“guarantee that [he] would not engage in sexual acts with prostitutes or other persons in 
7Item 5 (Applicant’s written statement to a Defense Security Service (DSS) Special Agent, was 
sworn on Dec. 11, 2006) at 1-2. Item 5 is the source for all facts in this section, unless stated otherwise.  
 
8 In Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), the U.S. Supreme Court reversed a Texas Court 
decision upholding TPC Ann. § 21.06, which made it a crime for two persons of the same sex to engage 
in certain intimate sexual conduct.  The sexual activity at issue in Lawrence occurred in a private 
residence between consenting adults, as opposed to sexual activity in a public place.   
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
the future” (Id. at 7).  In his response to the SOR he stated, “Now that I know the 
specific behaviors that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, I will no 
longer engage in these behaviors while I hold a security clearance” (Item 2 at 1). 
 
Although he disclosed the information about the above sexual behavior to U.S. 
government investigators in the past, he has not disclosed such information to his wife, 
children, his family, co-workers, supervisors, and neighbors (Id. at 7).  He deliberately 
concealed the public sexual behavior and sexual behavior with prostitutes from friends 
and family because he knew it would hurt them (Id. at 7).  He said he was embarrassed 
and ashamed of his conduct, but emphasized he would not allow himself to be 
blackmailed or coerced to compromise classified information to avoid disclosure of this 
information (Id. at 7).   
 
Applicant would report any attempts to coerce him to appropriate security officials 
(Id. at 7).  He has never compromised sensitive or classified information (Id. at 8).  
 
The majority of the offenses occurred in Texas, and as such violate two criminal 
statutes: Texas Penal Code (TPC) § 21.07 prohibiting “public lewdness”9 and TPC § 
43.02 prohibiting solicitation of sexual acts in return for a fee.10    
9 TPC § 21.07 provides the elements for the offense of public lewdness stating:  
 
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly engages in any of the following acts in a 
public place or, if not in a public place, he is reckless about whether another is present 
who will be offended or alarmed by his: (1) act of sexual intercourse; (2) act of deviate 
sexual intercourse; (3) act of sexual contact; or (4) act involving contact between the 
person's mouth or genitals and the anus or genitals of an animal or fowl. 
 
(b) An offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor. 
 
Under Texas law, an individual peep show booth in an adult bookstore, where a defendant sat beside an 
undercover police officer and began rubbing her genital area, was a public place within the meaning of 
TPC § 1.07, as the evidence showed it was a part of the "shop" open to the public and occupants of the 
booth had no right to expect privacy.  See Westbrook v. State, 624 S.W.2d 294 (Tex. App. Dallas 1981).  
Moreover, the interior of a defendant's car was a "public place" as defined in TPC § 1.07 where the car 
was parked on a public street in a residential area; the windows were not tinted or shaded; and an officer 
who stood in the public roadway was able to see defendant's companion's genitals. See Edwards v. 
State, 1987 Tex. App. LEXIS 6671 (Tex. App. Houston 14th Dist. Apr. 2, 1987). TPC § 1.07(a) (40) states,  
“(40) ‘Public place’ means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access 
and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, 
apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.).” 
 
10 Under TPC § 43.02, the criminal offense of prostitution includes the following elements:  
 
(a) A person commits [prostitution] if he knowingly: 
 
   (1) offers to engage, agrees to engage, or engages in sexual conduct for a fee; or 
   (2) solicits another in a public place to engage with him in sexual conduct for hire. 
 
(b) An offense is established under Subsection (a)(1) whether the actor is to receive or 
pay a fee. An offense is established under Subsection (a)(2) whether the actor solicits a 
person to hire him or offers to hire the person solicited. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”11 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 
(c) An offense under this section is a Class B misdemeanor, unless the actor has 
previously been convicted one or two times of an offense under this section, in which 
event it is a Class A misdemeanor. If the actor has previously been convicted three or 
more times of an offense under this section, the offense is a state jail felony. 
 
11 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something 
less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).12 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Subsections 3.1(c) and 
3.1(d) state: 
 
(c) The United States Government does not discriminate on the basis of 
. . .   sexual orientation in granting access to classified information. 
 
(d) In determining eligibility for access under this order, agencies may 
investigate and consider any matter that relates to the determination of 
whether access is clearly consistent with the interests of national security. 
No inference concerning the standards in this section may be raised solely 
on the basis of the sexual orientation of the employee. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
  
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
 
12 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
7 
 
 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and, 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 13(b) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant is unable 
to stop his public sexual behavior or his sexual behavior involving solicitation of 
prostitutes for sexual activity. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c) and 13(d) all apply. His sexual 
behavior is criminal in that it violates Texas Penal Code §§ 21.07 and 43.02.  Applicant 
is vulnerable to coercion, exploitation or duress because he does not want the 
information about his sexual misbehavior with prostitutes and in public to become 
known to his family, friends, neighbors, co-workers and supervisors. His sexual 
misbehavior in the adult arcades is of a public nature because others can view it from 
outside the booths. Moreover, his sexual misbehavior reflects a lack of discretion and 
judgment.  
    
AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and,  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
8 
 
 
  
AG ¶¶ 14(a), 14(c) and 14(d) do not apply.  The sexual behavior involving 
prostitutes occurred between 1977 and October 2006, and Applicant is now 58 years 
old. His sexual misconduct continued well past his adolescence, and is not a youthful 
indiscretion. The sexual behavior in the adult arcades is not “strictly private.”  Because 
of his embarrassment and fears that information about his sexual behavior will hurt his 
family and friends, he is subject to coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 14(b) partially applies. Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 
14(b) by showing that the sexual behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” 
rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a 
careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”  
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows a 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct, then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
AG ¶ 14(b) does not fully apply because Applicant’s most recent sexual behavior 
with prostitutes occurred in October 2006, and his sexual acts at adult bookstores and 
arcades occurred within the last several years. However, his incidents of masturbation 
in a car occurred in the 1980s, and this particular misconduct is mitigated by the 
passage of time. The masturbation in the car was not repeated after the 1980s. There is 
not enough information about the incidents involving masturbation in the car to be 
confident that the conduct was public. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . .; and, 
 
 
9 
 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(e)(1) and 16(f) apply. The 2002 security letter warned Applicant that 
his conduct with prostitutes could result in the loss of his security clearance.  He 
acknowledged he understood the restrictions against sexual activity with prostitutes, 
and yet he subsequently violated that written directive. Certainly disclosure of 
Applicant’s sexual misconduct with prostitutes and public sexual activity in adult arcades 
and bookstores would negatively affect his personal, professional, or community 
standing, 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 
10 
 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies with respect to the masturbation in his car in the early 1980’s 
for the reasons stated in the previous section.  However, this mitigation will not be 
reflected in the Formal Findings section because all Personal Conduct concerns are 
consolidated in SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
None of the other mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s conduct did 
not involve falsification of any documents, or attempts to obstruct or mislead a security 
investigation. He did not receive counseling designed to change his sexual conduct, and 
he did not describe other positive steps to change his sexual misbehavior. Applicant 
admitted the sexual behavior at issue, and the sexual behavior alleged in the SOR is  
substantiated. He was associating with people engaged in prostitution and public sexual 
acts as recently as October 2006. His equivocal promise not to engage in future, similar 
sexual misbehavior, while holding a security clearance, does not convince me that 
similar misbehavior is unlikely to recur. The sexual misbehavior at issue casts doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment because he was unable to conform his 
sexual behavior to criminal laws in Texas, especially after being warned of the 
consequences of engaging in sexual activity with prostitutes in the 2002 security letter.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
Applicant voluntarily and candidly disclosed his criminal sexual misbehavior to 
security officials. He provided the only record evidence showing his sexual misconduct. 
His promise to refrain from illegal sexual behavior in the future weighs in his favor. 
Some of the sexual conduct, specifically the incidents of masturbation in a car in the 
1980s occurred so long ago that they have little probative value. He provided evidence 
of remorse, or regret concerning his sexual misconduct. He was embarrassed by his 
misconduct, he showed some remorse, and he recognized the damage his sexual 
misconduct might cause to his family and his reputation. His record of good employment 
weighs in his favor. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. 
 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
  The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. His  
sexual behavior involving prostitutes, and public sexual acts was knowledgeable and 
voluntary. His sexual misconduct occurred over more than 25 years, and he was about 
56 years old when he last violated Texas laws concerning indecent sexual behavior and 
solicitation of prostitution. He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his 
conduct. Criminal sexual misbehavior is not prudent or responsible. His criminal sexual 
behavior, while holding a security clearance, and after being warned in the 2002 
security letter to stop this sexual misconduct or potentially lose his clearance, is 
particularly aggravating, and weighs heavily against granting or continuing his security 
clearance. He did not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have a clear 
understanding about how to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in the 
sexual misconduct. 
 
  I have persistent and serious doubts about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. His criminal sexual misconduct calls into question his current ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
sexual behavior and personal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”13 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
13See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge  
    
  
