KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: After the government presents evidence raising security concerns the burden shifts to
the Applicant to establish mitigation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-16159.a1
DATE: 01/10/2008
DATE: January 10, 2008,
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-16159
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 16, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
2
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 23, 2007, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding
Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application was deliberate; whether the Judge’s
unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
(1) Applicant argues that he did not deliberately falsify his response to two questions on his
security clearance application by failing to disclose multiple debts that had been delinquent for more
than 90 or 180 days.  In support of that argument, Applicant contends that he failed to disclose the
information because he misunderstood the scope of the questions.  Applicant’s argument does not
demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  His ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline
E is sustainable.
 
(2) Applicant also argues that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns
raised by his history of financial difficulties had been mitigated because his indebtedness had
resulted from a failed business venture approximately six years ago, and the  circumstances which
led to his financial problems were not likely to recur.  In support of this argument, Applicant submits
additional documentary evidence which was not submitted at the hearing.  He also cites to several
DOHA Hearing Office decisions in which an applicant in ostensibly similar circumstances was
granted a clearance.  Given the totality of the record evidence, Applicant’s arguments do not
demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Board may not consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Its submission does not demonstrate error on the part of the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-
12789 at 3 (App. Bd. May 13, 2005). 
The Board gives due consideration to the Hearing Office cases which Applicant has cited in
his appeal brief.  However, such decisions are not binding on Hearing Office Judges or on the Board.
See ISCR Case No. 05-14853 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2007).  They do not demonstrate error in this
case.  See ISCR Case No. 06-18340 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007). 
Once there has been a concern articulated regarding an applicant’s security eligibility, there
is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v.
Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After theth
government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating
conditions does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts
Decision at 6.1
3
of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record
evidence as a whole.”  See ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  “Thus, the
presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security
clearance decision.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-02833 (App. Bd. Mar.19, 2007).  “As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the Guideline F allegations had not been mitigated.  Although the Applicant strongly disagrees
with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision he still had
approximately $96,000 in outstanding debts and “ . . . had made no effort to pay any of the debts
alleged, even though he had the means to do so.”   In light of the foregoing, the Judge could1
reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent and still ongoing.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun.
29, 2005).  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
