                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-23135 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B, C and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 27, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing on August 30, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 16, 
2007, and I received the case assignment on November 16, 2007. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on November 20, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 11, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(AE) A through J, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 17, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Israel. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant has been a senior principal consulting engineer for a federal contractor 
since 2003. He was born in Israel in 1954 and he immigrated with his family to the U.S. 
in 1965. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1973. He has one brother who is also 
a naturalized citizen of the U.S. His brother is married and lives with his wife and child in 
the U.S. Applicant’s father is no longer living and his mother resides in California. 
Applicant is married and has two children. They are all U.S. citizens.  
 
 Applicant attended college and went through Navy ROTC. Upon graduation from 
college in 1976 he was commissioned in the Navy and served until 1980. He continued 
to serve in the Naval Reserves until 1983. He was a nuclear qualified submarine officer 
until he resigned to pursue an engineering career in the defense industry. During his 
military and civilian career he held a top secret clearance and had access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) and held a Department of Energy “Q” clearance to 
allow him to work in the nuclear field. He also passed a lifestyle polygraph and special 
background investigation.1 He is also  a member in good standing of the Coast Guard 
Auxiliary and is attached to a Flotilla based in the state where he lives.2 
 
 In 2002 Applicant went to Israel for approximately two weeks to vacation and 
attend his brother’s wedding. While at the wedding he visited with aunts, uncles and 
cousins. He does not stay in contact with these relatives and has only had contact 3-4 
times with them in the past 40 years. They all work in the private sector. He does not 
maintain contact with anyone else in Israel.3  
1 Tr. 43-47. 
  
2 AE A. 
 
3 Tr. 50-54. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 When Applicant entered Israel he used his U.S. passport. He was advised by 
Israeli authorities that because he was born in Israel in order to leave he would be 
required to obtain an Israeli passport. He went to the appropriate office and he advised 
them he was a U.S. citizen and lives in the U.S. In lieu of having to obtain an Israeli 
passport he was given an Israeli travel document that would allow him to leave Israel. 
This document may be used in lieu of a passport. He used this document to leave 
Israel.4  
 
 Applicant’s brother was a successful doctor in the U.S. and had residences in 
both the U.S. and Israel at one time. He retired from the medical field and is now 
involved in venture capital investments. He and his wife had a child in April 2006. His 
brother’s wife is German and she has a U.S. green card.5 They were in Israel and when 
she obtained her green card she was required to enter the U.S. by December 2006. 
Applicant anticipated they would be arriving in the U.S. in June or July of 2006. He 
anticipated seeing his new niece when his brother and family arrived. His brother’s 
arrival date kept being delayed. Applicant’s wife found inexpensive plane tickets and 
Applicant had a week of vacation to use, so although they had not planned on going 
back to Israel, they decided to go and see the new baby. They traveled to Israel in 
October 2006 for the purpose of visiting his brother, his wife and new baby. Applicant 
was required to renew the Israeli travel document he obtained in 2002. This document 
only allowed him to travel in and out of Israel. He could not travel to any other country 
on this document. His brother and his family moved permanently back to the U.S. in 
December 2006. His brother had always maintained a residence in the U.S. He had 
business contacts in Israel and the U.S., but his primary residence was in the U.S. He 
no longer maintains a residence in Israel.  
 
 Applicant does not have an Israeli passport. He had an Israeli travel document 
that was issued to him so he could leave Israel. He denies he is a dual citizen of Israel. 
He has formally renounced any citizen rights he may have had with Israel.6 He 
requested confirmation of his request, but had not received it at the time of the hearing. 
At the present time he does not have any plans to travel to Israel.7 
 
 When providing information for his security clearance application (SCA), 
Applicant listed his brother’s address in California as his brother’s place of residence. At 
the time his brother was living in Israel, but was traveling back and forth to the U.S. 
Applicant provided an address where he knew his brother could be located in the event 
someone wanted to interview him as part of his background check. He also knew his 
brother would be returning shortly to the U.S. to reside permanently. He did not 
deliberately conceal the information that his brother had a residence in Israel as this 
 
 
4 Tr. 53-61, 64-66; AE G. 
 
5 Tr. 47-49. 
 
6 AE B, C. 
 
7 Tr. 90-94. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
information had been previously disclosed as early as 2003. He was merely attempting 
to provide an address where he believed his brother would be easily located. Applicant 
on previous occasions advised the government that his brother was living in Israel.8  
 
 When answering question 17 on his SCA that inquired if Applicant had a foreign 
passport, he answered “No.” Applicant answered this question correctly and honestly. 
The document he held was not a passport. He answered “No” on interrogatories that 
asked the same question and specifically indicated he had a “pass” document and 
attached a copy of it to the interrogatories.9 Applicant did not intend to mislead anyone. 
He simply answered the questions truthfully and provided an explanation of the 
document he did hold.10  
 
 On June 27, 2006, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He 
indicated that he had no plans to visit Israel. At that time he did not have plans to travel 
to Israel and this statement was true. However, his plans changed when his brother 
delayed his move back to the U.S. That is when he and his family decided to go and 
visit their new niece.11 At the time he completed his SCA he did not intend on returning 
to Israel. His plans changed after completion of the SCA. He did not deliberately provide 
false or misleading information. The information he provided at the time he completed 
the SCA was truthful and honest.  
 
 Applicant does not own any property in Israel.  
 
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy. Israel’s prime minister leads the executive 
branch of the government. The United States is Israel’s leading trading partner. Israel 
respects the rights of its citizens; however, there are some concerns about Israel’s 
detention and interrogation of alleged terrorists, and discrimination against Arabs. 
Terrorism is a continuing threat to Israel, and American interests in Israel. Since 1948, 
the United States and Israel have developed a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. Occasionally, Israeli and 
American interests have diverged. Several U.S. government employees have been 
prosecuted for disclosure of classified information to persons connected to the Israeli 
government. Israel has an active program to gather proprietary information from U.S. 
companies.12  
 
 
 
 
8 Tr. 71-75. 
 
9 GE 2. 
  
10 Tr. 76-78. 
 
11 Tr. 78-89. 
 
12 HE I.  
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered AG ¶ 10 (a) (exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport) and (b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign 
citizenship by an American citizen.) Applicant did not have a foreign passport nor did he 
take any action to obtain or acquire recognition as a foreign citizen. He merely complied 
with Israel’s requirements to obtain a travel document when he attempted to enter Israel 
as a U.S. citizen born in Israel. I find none of the disqualifying conditions apply. 
However, if the Israeli travel document is construed to be an exercise of foreign 
citizenship, I have considered all the mitigating conditions applicable to this guideline. 
Specifically I have considered AG ¶ 11 (a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ 
citizenship or birth in a foreign country); (b) (the individual has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship) and (e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to 
the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.) Applicant was born in Israel 
and as a child his family immigrated to the U.S. and he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. AG ¶ 11 (a) applies. Applicant does not consider himself an Israeli citizen, but 
because Israel considers him one he has formally renounced any citizenship ties with 
Israel. AG ¶ 11 (b) applies. Applicant does not have an Israeli passport. The Israeli 
travel document he was required to obtain to exit Israel is expired. I find AG ¶11 (c) 
applies if it was applied to a travel document. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The SOR alleged under this guideline that Applicant traveled twice to 
Israel. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7. Even taking 
 
7 
 
 
the most expansive interpretation of the disqualifying conditions I find none apply. 
Although he traveled to Israel and AG ¶ 7 (i) (conduct, especially while traveling outside 
the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by a foreign person, group, government, or country) might be considered, 
there was no evidence offered about Applicant’s conduct while he was traveling and 
there was nothing to show he is vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered (a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) and (b) (deliberately providing false 
or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative) under this guideline. I have considered all of the facts and find Applicant 
did not deliberately omit, conceal, mislead, or falsify any information. He did not have an 
Israeli passport, but rather had a travel document that he provided when he submitted 
his interrogatories. The question was clear when it asked if he had a passport. It did not 
ask if he had any documents from a foreign country and it is unfair to extrapolate such 
an interpretation. The fact is when provided the opportunity to explain what document 
he had in his possession he did so and provided a copy of it. Applicant provided the 
best address for his brother so that he could be easily contacted for a background 
check. He knew his brother was in the process of moving back to the U.S. but did not 
know the exact date. Applicant was not attempting to mislead, but rather was attempting 
to assist investigators. When Applicant completed his interrogatories he did not intend 
on returning to Israel. Due to the delay of his brother’s return and securing inexpensive 
plane tickets, he and his family decided to go visit their new niece. Altering his plans 
after he completed the interrogatories is not a deliberate falsification. I find none of the 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
8 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Israel and is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. He has served his country in the Navy and held a Top Secret 
Security Clearance. He was required to comply with Israel’s exit rules and obtain a 
travel document because he was born there and not by choice. He has not exercised 
any dual citizenship rights and in an abundance of caution has formally renounced any 
citizenship ties he may have with Israel. Israel is a close ally with the U.S. and it is 
unlikely to exploit U.S. citizens through coercion. Applicant answered all questions in his 
SCA honestly. He did not deliberately omit, mislead or falsify any information.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign preference, 
foreign influence and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
Administrative Judge 
