  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 06-24460
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on June 14, 2007. The SOR is equivalent to
an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in
this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems as evidenced by delinquent debts.   
In addition, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines)
approved by the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then
modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September
1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised2
Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 3, 2007, and did not request a hearing.
Department counsel exercised its prerogative under the Directive and requested a
hearing on October 22, 2007. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2007. The
hearing took place as scheduled on December 19, 2007, and the transcript (Tr.) was
received on January 2, 2008.
The record was left open until December 31, 2007, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit documentary evidence in addition to Applicant’s Exhibits A and B.
No such matters were received and the record closed on December 31, 2007. For the
reasons discussed below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
Procedural Rulings
The SOR was amended to correct the spelling of Applicant’s first name.
Otherwise, there were no procedural or other issues raised by the parties. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges ten delinquent debts ranging from $99 to
$13,812 for about $41,0000 in total. The ten debts consist of two judgments, one
charged-off account, and seven collection accounts. His response to the SOR is mixed,
admitting eight and denying two of the debts. Also, he contended that two of the debts
were duplicates. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 33-year-old systems analyst. He has worked for his current
employer since February 2000. His day-to-day duties consist of writing software and
delivering software packages across a network, including a classified network. His
current annual salary is about $50,000. Recent performance evaluations show Applicant
performs his duties well (Exhibit A). He is seeking to retain a security clearance
previously granted to him by the Defense Department.    
Applicant has been married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce. He married
his current wife in 2002. There were no children from his first marriage, but he now has
a 4-year-old son and he recently adopted his wife’s 11-year-old son. 
His wife worked in sales until she was laid off in about October 2002. Other than
some seasonal and periodic employment, none of which lasted more than about 90
3
days, she was unemployed until about November 2007 when she was hired as a county
corrections officer. She is in training and her wages will increase when she completes
the training course and assumes full duties. Her unemployment starting in 2002 reduced
their household income and resulted in many financial problems.
Applicant has a history of financial problems as evidenced by two unpaid
judgments, the charged-off account, and the seven collection accounts. The debts
alleged in the SOR, except as noted below, are established by credit reports (Exhibits 2,
3, and 4). None of these debts have been paid, settled, or otherwise resolved.
Applicant denies two debts. The first denial is to a $277 medical collection
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He denies this debt because it should have been paid
through his health insurance. This debt is not established by any of the three credit
reports. One credit report shows an unpaid medical collection account reported in
December 2006 for $571 (Exhibit 2 at 2). Given this inconsistency, the evidence is not
sufficient to establish the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
The other denial is to a $99 collection account based on cable TV services
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. He denies this debt because he currently receives services from
the same company and the account is current. He is unaware if this debt stems from
living at a previous residence. He presented no documentary information on this debt.
The debt is established by all three credit reports, and this evidence is sufficient to
establish the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant contends the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are duplicates and the same
goes for the debts in ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h. Review of the three credit reports shows that the
debts in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are separate judgments for different amounts taken by different
parties. Likewise, review of the credit reports shows that the debts in ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h are
separate debts. Applicant did not present any documentary information to contradict or
rebut the credit reports. Accordingly, these matters are considered separate debts. 
Applicant has not obtained any financial or credit counseling. He and his wife
have read and are using a book to repair their credit. He had no financial obligations
stemming from his divorce. His rent, car payment, telephone, and utilities are current.
Likewise, all other recurring monthly expenses are current. Neither he nor his wife use
credit cards. They manage their money and bill paying by using a debit card and online
banking. His wife takes care of the day-to-day money-management responsibilities.
Essentially, they live paycheck-to-paycheck and this has been the situation since his
wife lost her job in 2002. Their financial situation is starting to improve based on his
wife’s recent employment. They have about $1,000 in a savings account. Applicant has
a 401(k) account at work and contributes about 3% each pay period. He is unaware of
the account’s balance. 
Applicant’s employment history includes military service. He enlisted in the Army
in 1992 after graduating from high school (Exhibit B). Initially, he was trained as a
cavalry scout and he served with a prestigious airborne division. Thereafter, he
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
4
completed a 32-week training course in explosive ordnance disposal (EOD). He served
his last three years on active duty as an EOD specialist. During this assignment, he held
a security clearance and had access to classified information. He left active duty in 1999
and received an honorable discharge. His discharge paperwork reflects, among other
things, three Army Achievement Medals and three Army Good Conduct Medals. In
addition, he served about three years in a state national guard until his medical
discharge due to back problems, and he received an honorable discharge.
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2)  revokes any5
existing security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
5
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations16 17
within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more than sufficient to
establish these two disqualifying conditions, which raise a security concern.
 MC 2 is “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g.,18
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
 MC 4 is “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”19
6
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F have been considered and two
deserve discussion. First, MC 2—conditions largely beyond a person’s
control—applies.  Obviously, the unemployment from Applicant’s wife from October18
2002 until November 2007 (except for some seasonal and periodic work) resulted in
loss of income and was the primary cause of the financial problems. Likewise, it
appears Applicant acted reasonably under the circumstances because he did the best
he could with the limited income available to him. Given these circumstances, Applicant
receives some credit in mitigation under MC 2.  
Second, a potential mitigating condition is MC 4, which requires a person to
initiate a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.19
Applicant has made few efforts to resolve the delinquent debts. Other than reading the
credit-repair book, Applicant has not made any real progress. Given these
circumstances, in light of the  unaddressed delinquent debts, his efforts do not amount
to a good-faith effort within the meaning of the guideline. Something more is required. 
Applicant is 33 years old and sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions about
his finances. Although his intent to resolve his financial problems appears to be
genuine, he has done little so far to demonstrate his intent. What is missing here is (1) a
realistic and workable plan to clean up his financial house, (2) documented actions
taken in furtherance of the plan, and (3) a measurable improvement to the situation.
Given the current circumstances, it is likely that the financial problems will continue or
recur because Applicant is facing substantial financial problems, starting with the two
unpaid judgments for more than $18,000.  
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the financial considerations security concern. Applicant did not meet his
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this
conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis
does not support a favorable decision. In this regard, I gave weight to Applicant’s
honorable military service, his history of holding a security clearance without an adverse
incident, and his favorable work history. Nevertheless, these matters were not sufficient
to change the outcome. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1j (except 1.d) Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
