 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 06-22081 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 30, 
2005.  On July 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 6, 2007; answered the 
SOR on August 16, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 21, 2007.  The case was 
assigned to an administrative judge on September 24, 2007, and reassigned to me on 
October 24, 2007, based on workload.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
 
2 
 
 
1, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 15, 2007. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and submitted one exhibit, Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which 
was admitted without objection.  
 
I kept the record open to enable Applicant to submit additional matters.  He 
timely submitted AX B, C, and D, and they were admitted without objection.  
Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX B, C, and D are attached to the record 
as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. The record closed on November 30, 2007.  DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2007.  Based upon my review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
The hearing was convened less than 15 days after the notice of hearing was 
issued.  I advised Applicant of his right under Directive ¶ E3.1.8 to written notice 15 
days before the hearing.  Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days written 
notice. (HX II; Tr. 18.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a and 
part of ¶ 1.b with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 2.a.  His 
admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old field engineer for a defense contractor.  He served on 
active duty in the U.S. Army from December 1974 to December 1977 and from October 
1980 to December 1997.  He held a security clearance while he was on active duty.  He 
has bachelor’s degrees in organizational management and counseling (Tr. 8).  He has 
worked for his current employer since December 1997, and he has held his current 
security clearance for about 10 years.  His operations manager, who has known him for 
more than 20 years, describes him as a level-headed person of integrity, responsibility, 
and character above reproach (AX C at 2). 
 
 Applicant was married in November 1980.  He has two sons, ages 27 and 26, 
and a 14-year-old daughter (Tr. 31).  His younger son was born severely handicapped, 
unable to walk until he was four years old.  He still is incapable of living alone.  
Applicant was on active duty for the first 16 years of his disabled son’s life, leaving his 
wife almost solely responsible for his care (Tr. 59-60). 
 
 In July 2004, Applicant voluntarily disclosed to his security manager that he was 
receiving psychiatric counseling for depression and had been prescribed anti-
depressant medication (Tr. 34-35; AX A).  His medical records reflect a diagnosis of 
major depression, moderate, recurrent, and history of alcohol abuse (GX 6).  With his 
 
3 
 
 
psychiatrist’s approval, Applicant stopped taking anti-depressant medication in April 
2006 (Tr. 55).  He now deals with stress by participating in a therapy group at his 
church, doing yoga, meditating, and participating in vigorous physical exercise (Tr. 56). 
 
 When Applicant executed his SF 86, he answered “no” to question 19, asking if 
he had consulted with a mental health professional in the last seven years (GX 1 at 5).  
He testified that his negative answer to question 19 was an inadvertent mistake.  He 
had discussed his criminal record with his security manager a few minutes before 
completing the SF 86 and was focused on updating his criminal record.  He also was 
comparing his answers to a previous SF 86, on which question 19 was correctly 
answered in the negative.  These factors caused him to incorrectly answer “no” to 
question 19, even though he had previously disclosed to his security manager that he 
was receiving psychiatric counseling (Tr. 34).   
 
 Applicant believes that the stress of caring for their handicapped son was a major 
problem in his marriage (Tr. 59). The marriage began to deteriorate rapidly around the 
summer of 2003, with numerous arguments about many issues (Tr. 40).  
 
 During the summer of 2004, Applicant was contacted by a woman with whom he 
had a serious romantic relationship when he was younger and before his met his wife.  
The woman, although married, invited Applicant to visit her at her home in another 
state.  Applicant seriously considered accepting the invitation but then thought better of 
it.  His wife found out about the invitation.  Applicant admitted to his wife that he had 
received the invitation and contemplated accepting it.  According to Applicant, his wife 
would not give him the opportunity to explain their previous relationship (Tr. 39).    
 
 In early December 2004 Applicant and his wife again argued. On the night of 
December 7, 2004, they made up, and Applicant went to work on December 8, thinking 
everything was fine.  He did not know his wife complained to the police and obtained a 
temporary restraining order prohibiting all contact.  He was served with the restraining 
order at work, and he moved to a hotel (Tr. 36).   
 
 On December 21, 2004, the day the temporary restraining order was to expire, 
Applicant sent an email to his wife, saying they needed to talk (Tr. 38).; GX 4 at 2).  In 
the email (GX 4 at 2), he told his wife he backed out of the other woman’s invitation, 
“because you are the one that I love.”  He explained: “In spite of thinking about sinning, I 
did not sin.  I was going to tell you.  Sorry for lying.”  Applicant and his wife were due in 
court for a hearing to determine whether the restraining order should be continued or 
terminated, and Applicant expected the restraining order would be terminated and his 
wife would not read the email until after the hearing (Tr. 39-40).  His wife showed the 
email to the police, who arrested Applicant for violating the restraining order, a 
misdemeanor (GX 4 at 1, 3).  
 
 On January 8, 2005, his wife obtained a permanent restraining order.  Three 
days later, his wife invited him to her house to talk, and he accepted the invitation.  They 
met and talked more than 60 times, met several times at restaurants, his place of work, 
 
4 
 
 
and her residence. He broke off contact in late February or early March 2005, after his 
wife’s attorney called him and told him his wife was very upset by his conduct.  In April 
2005, the police arrested Applicant for violating the restraining order, harassment, and 
stalking (GX 2 at 4; GX 4 at 6).  All the charged offenses were misdemeanors (GX 5 at 
3).  
 
 The stalking charge was based on Applicant’s wife’s claim that he was following 
her.  According to Applicant, his wife drove to the park where he had been running for 
15 years, went to the YMCA where he exercised, and went to another YMCA when 
Applicant switched locations to avoid his wife (Tr. 43). 
 
 The district attorney offered to dismiss the violation of the first restraining order if 
Applicant would plead guilty to violating the second restraining order, harassment, and 
stalking.  Applicant agreed, contrary to the advice of his lawyer (Tr. 45).  He was fined 
$1,500, spent 17 days in jail on work release, and was placed on probation for two 
years (GX 2 at 4).  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant denied harassing or stalking his wife.  He testified he 
thought he was pleading guilty only to violating the second restraining order, and did not 
realize until a couple of weeks later that he had pleaded guilty to harassment and 
stalking (Tr. 44-45). 
 
 In October 2005, the restraining order was modified to permit both parents to 
attend school events and to communicate by cell phone about their minor daughter (Tr. 
53-54; AX C).  Applicant and his wife were divorced in November 2005.  His probation 
was terminated in March 2007 (AX D at 4).  He and his wife now meet in a public place 
to arrange visits with his daughter.  His handicapped son lives with him for six months 
and his ex-wife for six months (Tr. 58).  There have been no incidents between 
Applicant and his ex-wife since the restraining order was modified (Tr. 57). 
 
 Applicant disclosed his criminal record to his security manager and reported it in 
response to question 26 on his SF 86 (Tr. 34; GX 1 at 7).  His supervisor, coworkers, 
two sisters, and several close friends also know about his criminal record; and his ex-
wife, supervisor, coworkers, security manager, and friends know about his psychiatric 
counseling (GX 2 at 3-4). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . 
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person 
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
 
5 
 
 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information.  This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Clearance decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise 
of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-
0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested in December 2004 for violating a 
restraining order (SOR ¶ 1.a), and arrested in April 2005 for violating a restraining order, 
harassment, and stalking (SOR ¶ 1.b).  The first charge was dismissed pursuant to a 
plea agreement and the second resulted in a conviction pursuant to Applicant’s guilty 
plea.   
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant falsified his SF 86.  The allegation of falsification 
is alleged as both criminal conduct under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 1.c) and personal conduct 
under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 2.a).  His alleged falsification is discussed below under 
Guideline E. 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶ 30.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.”  AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a single violation of a restraining order.  SOR ¶ 1.b alleges 
multiple violations of a second restraining order.  Applicant admitted both allegations.  
Based on his admissions and the evidence of record, I conclude AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) 
are raised. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶ 32(a).  Applicant’s 
criminal conduct was preceded by more than 27 years of honorable military service 
while holding a security clearance.  The causes of Applicant’s criminal behavior are no 
longer present. The criminal conduct occurred while Applicant was undergoing 
psychiatric counseling for major depression, and it was motivated by his desire to save 
his marriage.  He finally realized that he could not save his marriage, and he was 
divorced in November 2005.  Since that time, the restraining order has been modified; 
he and his ex-wife have agreed on visitation arrangements for their minor daughter; and 
 
7 
 
 
they have agreed to share care-giving for their disabled son.  No further incidents 
between them have occurred.  
 
 Applicant has responded successfully to psychiatric counseling, no longer 
requires anti-depressant medications, and has found alternate ways to cope with stress.  
Throughout his domestic difficulties, he continued to demonstrate integrity, 
responsibility, and good character at work.  He continued to hold a security clearance 
without incident.  I conclude that his criminal conduct is unlikely to recur, and it does not 
cast doubt on his present reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  Accordingly, I 
conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns arising from criminal conduct also can be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  AG ¶ 
32(d).  Applicant’s conviction is almost three years old.  He has completed his period of 
probation, and the court has modified the restraining order to allow limited contact with 
his wife.  No misconduct has occurred since his conviction.  His work performance has 
never faltered in spite of his difficulties.  He is actively involved in a counseling and 
support group sponsored by his church.  He has changed his lifestyle to deal with stress 
in a productive and acceptable manner.  At the hearing, he expressed embarrassment 
and remorse for his conduct.  I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.a alleged Applicant falsified his SF 86 by deliberately 
failing to disclose his psychiatric treatment and medication.  The concern under 
Guideline E is as follows: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.”  AG ¶ 15.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”  AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it.  An omission, standing alone, does not prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
 
8 
 
 
omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 Applicant’s denial of intent to falsify his SF 86 is corroborated by his voluntary 
disclosure of his psychiatric counseling more than a year before he executed his SF 86.  
He presented himself at the hearing as sincere and open.  I found his explanation for his 
negative answer to question 19 plausible and credible.  I am satisfied his negative 
response to question 19 was an inadvertent mistake and not an intentional falsification.  
Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not raised.  Applicant has refuted the 
allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.a, and I resolve them in his favor.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of these factors 
were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult.  He has spent most of his adult life in 
government service, either as a soldier or as an employee of a defense contractor.  He 
has held a security clearance for most of his professional life, without incident.  His 
criminal conduct arose as the culmination of a troubled marriage, exacerbated by his 
bouts of depression and triggered by his confession to his ex-wife that he had 
considered infidelity but decided against it because of his continuing love for her.  
Although Applicant knew he was violating the restraining orders, it appears that his ex-
wife was complicit in his violations and used them to extract revenge for his thoughts of 
infidelity.  Applicant has overcome his problems with depression and ended his 
marriage, thereby removing the causes of his criminal conduct.  He is remorseful for his 
thoughts of infidelity and ill-advised attempts to save his marriage.  At the hearing, he 
was sincere, open, and credible. 
 
Applicant has been rehabilitated and has changed his life-style to avoid further 
problems with depression.  The likelihood of recurring criminal conduct is very remote.  
He has been candid with his family, supervisors, security officer, coworkers, and friends 
about his criminal record and his treatment for depression, eliminating his vulnerability 
to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
9 
 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has refuted the allegation that he falsified his SF 86, and he has mitigated the 
security concerns based on his violations of the restraining orders.  Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
