1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ADP Case No. 06-22993 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on 
October 13, 2005. On August 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant eligibility for a public trust position, citing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 3, 2007; answered 
the SOR in writing on September 6, 2007; and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  DOHA received the request on September 11, 2007. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 26, 2007.  The case was assigned to 
an administrative judge on October 16, 2007, and reassigned to me on October 24, 
2 
 
2007, based on workload.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 1, 2007, and 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 14, 2007. The government offered 
exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on 
her own behalf and submitted exhibits (AX) A through C, without objection. I kept the 
record open until November 30, 2007, to enable Applicant to submit additional matters.  
On November 19, 2007, she submitted AX D and E, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 21, 2007.  
The record closed on November 30, 2007.  Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is 
granted. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
The hearing was convened less than 15 days after the notice of hearing was 
issued.  I advised Applicant of her right under Directive ¶ E3.1.8 to written notice at least 
15 days before the hearing.  Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice. 
(Hearing Exhibit I; Tr. 19.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations.  Her admissions in her answer to the SOR and at the hearing 
are incorporated into my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old appointment clerk employed by a defense contractor 
supporting a military hospital. She has worked for her current employer since 
September 2005. She has never held a security clearance or received a trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
 Applicant was married in 1989 and divorced in 2000.  Her ex-husband died in 
2002. She and her ex-husband agreed to divide their joint obligations, but her ex-
husband did not pay his share.  Applicant kept up the payments on of the joint debts 
until she became ill.  
 
 Applicant underwent surgery for thyroid cancer in August 2003, a second thyroid 
surgery in November 2004, and a hysterectomy in January 2005 (Tr. 37). She was 
unable to work and fell behind on her debt payments. Her debts increased when she 
used credit cards for living expenses while she was medically unable to work (Tr. 38-39, 
46).  After her thyroid surgery, she became an insulin-dependent diabetic and suffers 
from hypertension (Tr. 39).   
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $18,855 that were charged off or 
placed for collection between December 2003 and December 2005. Applicant admitted 
all the debts and explained that she originally owed about $8,500 but the amounts of the 
debts rose because of late charges and penalties (Tr. 24).  Her creditors refused to 
accept partial payments (Tr. 39). 
 
3 
 
 In January 2006, Applicant moved her ailing father from hospice care to her 
home where she cared for him until his death in September 2006 (Tr. 60).  In February 
2007, her daughter, who was pregnant with her first child and whose husband was 
deployed to Iraq, injured her knee and was unable to drive or walk.  Applicant took two 
months of leave without pay to care for her daughter (Tr. 38, 62).  Applicant returned to 
work in April 2007 (Tr. 63).  
 
Applicant hired a bankruptcy lawyer in 2006, but she was unable to pay his entire 
fee. Instead, she made monthly payments of whatever amount she could afford, starting 
with a $250 payment in May 2006 (GX 6 at 2; Tr. 68-69).  In January 2007, she 
responded to DOHA interrogatories about her financial situation and stated she 
intended to file a bankruptcy petition (GX 6 at 3). In February 2007, she responded to 
further DOHA interrogatories and stated she was postponing her bankruptcy, because 
she was taking a leave of absence from work to care for her daughter who was 
undergoing knee surgery (GX 7 at 2). She made her last payment to her lawyer on 
October 19, 2007, and her petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy was filed on October 22, 
2007 (AX A and E).   
 
Applicant and her lawyer could not identify the current owners of some of the 
debts.  Instead of attempting to track down all the debts, they simply listed in her 
bankruptcy petition all creditors that appeared on her most recent credit reports, except 
for the holder of the note on her truck, a 1998 Dodge truck with 118,000 miles on it.  (AX 
D; AX E at 14).  Her truck payments are current (Tr. 70, 75). 
 
In October 2007, Applicant completed a consumer credit counseling course, and 
in November 2007, she completed a course on personal financial management (AX B 
and C).  Both courses were completed by agencies approved by the bankruptcy court. 
 
Applicant closed all her credit card accounts two years ago (Tr. 63).  She has 
been meeting all her current financial obligations (Tr. 71).  Her take-home pay is about 
$1,600 per month (Tr. 64).  As of the date of the hearing, her monthly expenses 
included a monthly payment of $250 for her truck and $300 for medications, and she 
had virtually no monthly remainder, had no savings, and was not contributing to any 
retirement plans.  
 
In November 2007, Applicant received a raise from $11.05 per hour to $13.98 
per hour (Tr. 66-67).  She now has medical insurance through her employer.  She is 
enrolled in an indigent program with her hospital because of her history of cancer and 
diabetes (Tr. 71).      
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
4 
 
C6.1.1.1.) Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable. 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions 
shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to 
the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information.  (See Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).)  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must 
present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the 
government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden 
shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15.) An applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant a favorable trustworthiness determination.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
  
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 
18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is raised where there is 
“indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any 
evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the 
debt.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which 
may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-
to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.”  
 
AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised, because there is no evidence of “frivolous or 
irresponsible spending.”  However, Applicant’s delinquent debts, her admitted inability to 
pay them, and her use of credit cards to fund basic living expenses that were beyond 
her ability to pay them are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c) and (e).  No other 
enumerated disqualifying conditions under this guideline are raised by the evidence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), a disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ This is a compound mitigating 
condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was “so long ago,” or “so infrequent,” or “occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.” If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct “does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.”   
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and frequent.  However, they are the 
result of a confluence of events: her divorce, the death of her ex-husband, her serious 
illness resulting in uninsured medical bills and loss of employment, the illness and death 
of her father, and the injury of her pregnant daughter whose husband was deployed to 
Iraq. This confluence of unfortunate events is not likely to recur.  Furthermore, Applicant 
reacted to these events by attempting to pay her debts until she was too ill to work.  She 
6 
 
unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate partial payments.  Her devotion to her family 
motivated her to care for her father and daughter without regard to her own financial 
needs.  Under all the circumstances, her financial problems do not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  I conclude this mitigating condition 
is established. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated 
where Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@  Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s control and 
responsible conduct, must be established. The events listed in the preceding paragraph 
were beyond Applicant’s control, and her response to them was reasonable.  I conclude 
this mitigating condition is established. 
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This mitigating condition also has two prongs 
that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive.  If the person has received counseling, it 
must also be shown that there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or 
under control.  However, if the person has not received counseling, this mitigating 
condition may still apply if there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or under control.  Applicant produced evidence of counseling in connection with her 
bankruptcy filing.  She had no financial delinquencies before her illness in 2003. Her 
current financial obligations are up-to-date.  A discharge in bankruptcy will resolve her 
financial problems that arose during 2003-2005.  Based on the evidence of record, 
including the contents of her bankruptcy petition, there is no reasonable likelihood that 
she will not receive a discharge in bankruptcy. I conclude this mitigating condition is 
established. 
 
The mitigating condition in AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”  ISCR 
Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  A discharge in 
bankruptcy will make her debts uncollectable, but it not “repay” or “resolve” Applicant’s 
debts within the meaning of AG ¶ 20(d).  Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 29(d) is not established.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. In addition to the enumerated 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each guideline, an administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) 
7 
 
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant is a mature woman who had a clean credit record until her illness in 
2003. At the hearing, she presented herself as somewhat unsophisticated in financial 
matters, but very candid, sincere, and credible.  Even after her divorce and the death of 
her ex-husband, she kept up the payments on the joint debts from her marriage.  Since 
her employment in 2005, she has lived frugally and within her means.  She has 
demonstrated her reliability and strong sense of obligation by taking care of her family, 
even though it worked to her financial detriment.  She has lived paycheck to paycheck, 
using her meager monthly net remainder to pay her lawyer’s fee for the bankruptcy.  
Now that she has satisfied that obligation, she will have some funds for her eventual 
retirement and for unexpected expenses.   
 
 Although Applicant’s bankruptcy does not establish the mitigating condition in AG 
¶ 20(d), it removes her vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
Considering the unusual confluence of events that caused her financial problems and 
her reasonable and responsible response to those events, I believe the likelihood that 
her financial problems will recur is nil. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial considerations.  Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national 
security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on each of the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 are set out below. 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h: For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position.  Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
                                 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
