KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising out of his ties to Taiwan.  Prior
Hearing Office cases are not binding on the Appeal Board.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-25743.a1
DATE: 01/10/2008
DATE: January 10, 2008
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25743
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 22, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.c and 1.f.  Those favorable findings
1
are not at issue on appeal.
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On August 16, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Elizabeth M.
Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Applicant timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns raised under
Guideline B had not been mitigated.     In support of that contention, Applicant essentially restates1
the facts of his case and argues that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence, by failing to give adequate
consideration to the favorable evidence.  Based upon the record as a whole, Applicant asserts that
the security concerns presented by his ties to Taiwan were outweighed by his ties to the United
States.  Applicant also argues that the Judge erred with respect to several of her findings and that her
overall unfavorable conclusion is inconsistent with other hearing-level decisions in which applicants
in ostensibly similar circumstances had been granted a clearance.  Applicant’s arguments do not
demonstrate error on the part of the Judge.
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).
We have considered the challenged findings in light of the record and conclude they are
based on substantial evidence.  Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s
material findings as to his circumstances of security concern, and the inferences drawn from those
findings, do not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the record evidence. 
Applicant points to several hearing-level cases by the Judge which he contends support
granting him a clearance.  The Board gives due consideration to these cases. See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 06-05903 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007).  However, the Board has previously noted that decisions
in other hearing-level cases are not legally binding precedent, even if an applicant can establish close
factual similarities between those cases and his case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-04004 at 2 (App.
Bd. Jul. 31, 2006).  Accordingly, the Judge was not legally obligated to reconcile her decision in this
case with her decisions in other ostensibly similar cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-24752 at 3
(App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2006).  “The adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables
known as the whole-person concept.”  Directive at ¶ 2.(a).  “Each case must be judged on its own
merits . . .” Id at ¶ 2.(b).
 
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
3
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-04371 at
2 (App. Bd. Oct.18, 2007). “ Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence,
or vice versa.”  See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 06-09542 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  “An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.”  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-08116 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2007). 
A review of the Judge’s decision indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence
offered by Applicant against the seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances, and considered the
possible application of relevant mitigating conditions and factors.  The Judge found in favor of
Applicant with respect to several of the factual allegations.  However, she reasonably explained why
the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the
government’s security concerns.  The Judge’s decision exhibits a discerning weighing of a number
of variables to reach a commonsense determination. Directive ¶ 2.(c).  In some instances, this
process led to favorable findings for Applicant.  However, the Judge also articulated a reasonable
concern that Applicant's circumstances could create a conflict of interest or be used to influence,
manipulate, or pressure him.  That concern is based on close family ties and significant financial
interests in Taiwan, considered in the context of the overall political/security profile of that country
vis-a-vis the United States.  Applicant offers an alternative interpretation of the record evidence.
However, that alternative interpretation of the record evidence is insufficient to render the Judge’s
interpretation arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-19101 at 2 (App.
Bd. Oct. 13, 2006).  The Judge has articulated a rational explanation for her unfavorable
determination under the disqualifying and mitigating factors and the whole-person concept, and there
is sufficient record evidence to support that determination—given the standard that required the
Judge to err on the side of national security.  Directive ¶ 2.(b).
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin     
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
