                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                        
 
1 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-25573 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Appellant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Foreign Preference and 
Foreign Influence.  Clearance is granted. 
 
 History of Case 
  
On March 21, 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86).1 On April 6, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and 
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
1GE 1 (Security Clearance Application is dated March 21, 2006 on p.1; however, the signature 
page is dated February 27, 2006.) For convenience, the security clearance application in this decision will 
be called an SF 86.    
 
 
2 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
modified and revised.2 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns under AGs C (Foreign Preference) and B 
(Foreign Influence). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
In an answer notarized on April 17, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have his case decided at a hearing. The case was originally 
assigned to another administrative judge on June 6, 2007, and due to caseload 
considerations was reassigned to me on August 22, 2007. On September 6, 2007, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case to be heard on October 16, 2007.  
The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered three documents, which were admitted without 
objections as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. The Applicant offered seven 
exhibits, which were admitted without objections as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
G. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 29, 2007. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of the facts in Exhibits 
(Exs.) I through XI. Applicant objected to Exs. I, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI. After 
argument by counsel, I overruled Applicant’s objections to these documents and took 
administrative notice of the documents offered by Department Counsel, which pertain to 
South Korea. (Tr. 18-27).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative AG to all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative AGs are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
 
South Korea were derived from Exs. I through XI as indicated under subheading “South 
Korea” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR 
with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact.   
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old project manager, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2005. He successfully held an interim secret clearance from 
December 2005 to April 2007, when it was revoked as a result of these proceedings. 
During that time-frame, Applicant was never involved in a security violation. He seeks 
reinstatement of his clearance, which is required to successfully perform his duties 
required by his employer.  
 
Apart from his wife, Applicant’s immediate family members include his father, 
mother, two sisters and one brother. Applicant and his immediate family were all born in 
South Korea. Applicant’s parents are retired university professors, and both parents 
hold Ph.D.s in chemical engineering. In 1982, Applicant’s father came to the U.S. after 
being invited to conduct research in chemical engineering at a major U.S. university. In 
1983, Applicant, his mother, two sisters and brother joined Applicant’s father in the U.S. 
At the time Applicant joined his father, he was 16 years old. 
 
After arriving in the U.S., Applicant, his siblings and mother remained in the U.S. 
for varying lengths of time, primarily for educational purposes. Throughout the years, 
Applicant’s parents went back and forth between the U.S. and South Korea as visiting 
professors. Applicant’s parents currently are resident citizens of South Korea. SOR ¶ 
2.b. Applicant’s parents lived in the U.S. for a cumulative total of 23 years before 
returning to South Korea. Tr. 77.  Applicant communicates with his parents “a couple of 
time a year on the phone.” Tr. 82. Applicant has three aunts, who along with their 
respective families live in the U.S. Tr. 89-90.  
 
After Applicant graduated from high school, he enrolled in the university where 
his father was conducting research, and was awarded a bachelor of science degree in 
mechanical engineering in December 1989. He went on to attend graduate school at the 
same university, and in May 1993 was awarded a master’s degree in mechanical 
engineering, and in July 1998 was awarded a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering.  All of 
Applicant’s post-education employment has been in the U.S. except for three years he 
worked in South Korea as a technical consultant and senior consultant from July 2002 
to July 2005. Tr. 81-82, GE 1.  After working in South Korea for this brief time, Applicant 
returned to the U.S. with his wife in September 2005 to begin his new position 
discussed supra and infra. Applicant has lived approximately 20 of his 40 years in the 
U.S. Tr. 82. It is his intent to permanently reside in the U.S. Tr. 82.   
 
 
4 
                                         
 
 
Like the Applicant, all of his siblings graduated from high school in the U.S. and 
spent a significant portion of their formative years in the U.S. All of Applicant’s three 
siblings went on to receive their higher education, which included graduate work in the 
U.S. Tr. 77-78. 
 
Applicant’s three siblings are currently resident citizens of South Korea. SOR ¶ 
2.c. Like his parents, Applicant communicates with his three siblings by telephone “[a] 
couple of times a year.” Tr. 83-84. Applicant’s brother is a civil engineer employed by a 
private firm, one his sisters works as an engineer at a private electronics company, and 
his other sister works at a private bank. Tr. 88.  
 
None of Applicant’s immediate family members are associated with or connected 
with the South Korean government. During the time Applicant’s parents were employed 
as university professors working in South Korea, they were “technically” working for the 
South Korean government given they were employed at a public university. Applicant 
described his parent’s employment as university professors in South Korea similar to 
employment as a professor at a state university in the U.S. Tr. 84-85.  
 
Applicant has no reason to believe any of his family members would be 
susceptible to coercion, pressure or blackmail from the South Korean government as a 
means of extracting classified information from him. Applicant believes this to be the 
case because his family members are well traveled, savvy and not the type of people 
who would easily be intimidated. Tr. 86-87. Applicant stated if he were approached by 
anyone seeking classified information, he would report such contact to his supervisor 
and facility security officer. Tr. 87.    
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2001, and has held a U.S. 
passport since September 2001. He is not a citizen or passport holder of any other 
country other than the U.S. He emphatically stated he owes his loyalties to the U.S. Tr. 
92. 
 
Applicant was previously married from January 1992 to February 1997, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. His current wife, like him, was born in South Korea, but was 
residing in the U.S. with her entire family at the time they met in July 2002. They 
married in South Korea in January 2003, and at present do not have any children. 
Applicant’s wife is a South Korean citizen holding permanent resident alien status and 
lives with Applicant in the U.S. SOR ¶ 2.a. She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship, but 
must first comply with the five-year waiting period to become a citizen. She will be 
eligible to apply in two years. Applicant’s wife was a musician by profession in South 
Korea before emigrating to the U.S. At present, she attends school and is studying 
English as a second language. 
 
Given the amount of time Applicant has lived in the U.S., he and his wife live as 
“very much American.” He described his home as an “American environment” as 
opposed to a “Korean environment.” Apart from work, Applicant plays golf and is a 
member of a city league soccer team. Tr. 89. 
 
5 
                                         
 
 
 
 
His wife’s immediate family consists of her mother, two older sisters, and one 
younger brother, and they all live in the U.S. Her father passed away in 2002. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law has lived in the U.S. since 1996. She is a citizen of South 
Korea residing in the U.S. as a permanent resident alien. SOR ¶ 2.d. His mother-in-law 
is a permanent resident and plans to apply for U.S. citizenship when eligible. Neither 
Applicant’s wife nor her immediate family have ever had any connections with or are 
associated with the South Korean government. Applicant’s mother-in-law is retired and 
his two sisters-in-law own bakery shops in the U.S. Tr. 73-74. Applicant’s brother-in-law 
is a student. 
 
Two of Applicant’s supervisors testified on his behalf. Both supervisors hold top 
secret clearances. They interact daily with the Applicant and they along with their 
spouses socialize with Applicant and his wife. Both supervisors have a very high opinion 
of Applicant and consider him to be a very trusted and valuable employee.  During the 
last performance cycle, Applicant was performing at such a superior level that he was 
the only employee selected from his team to receive additional stock options.  Both 
supervisors enthusiastically and without reservation recommended Applicant for a 
security clearance. Tr. 35-52. 
 
The supervisory computer engineer at the government entity where Applicant is 
employed submitted a reference letter. He stated in part, “my organization would be 
drastically hurt if [Applicant] was not granted the necessary security clearance to 
support [mission].”  He also stated that if Applicant is not granted a security clearance 
and allowed to continue working at his government entity, not only would his 
organization suffer by losing Applicant, but also “the US Army and its warfighters would 
suffer the ramifications of his loss of knowledge as well.”  He strongly recommended 
Applicant for a security clearance. AE G.   
 
Lastly, the wife of one of Applicant’s supervisors who testified submitted a 
reference letter. She extolled on the many fine virtues Applicant and his wife have to 
include their values, integrity, and honesty. She stated, “I deal with many ‘Americans’ 
who have no respect for their fellow man or for our Country. In my opinion, [Applicant 
and his wife] truly appreciate the values and principles upon which our Country was 
founded and do not take these gifts for granted. . . . [Applicant and his wife] have the 
utmost integrity and as a natural born American, I am very pleased that individuals of 
this caliber want to be part of our culture and especially to be such good friends to my 
husband and me.” AE G. 
 
Since 1996, Applicant has traveled to South Korea six times. SOR ¶ 2.e. The first 
visit was in 1998 for a holiday family visit, the second time was in 2001 for a holiday 
family visit, the third time was in 2002 for a job interview, the fourth time was again in 
2002 to work, the fifth time was in 2003 to attend a professional conference, and the 
sixth time was in 2005 after returning to South Korea after a job interview in the U.S. Tr. 
80-81. 
 
6 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged Applicant maintains a bank account in South Korea with a 
balance of approximately $13,000.00. Applicant submitted documentation that 
established his account in South Korea was closed and the remaining balance of 
$15,834.27 was deposited in his U.S. bank account on June 7, 2007. Tr. 91, GE F.     
 
Applicant has no financial interests in South Korea.  All of his financial interests 
are in the U.S., which includes a home, mutual funds, a 401(k), a certificate of deposit, 
and checking and savings accounts. Tr. 91-92. 
 
South Korea3 
 
In the decades following the Korean War, South Korea experienced political 
turmoil that included autocratic leadership, restrictions to political freedoms, military 
coups, declarations of martial law, and violent confrontations. 
 
Currently, South Korea is a stable, democratic republic.2 The South Korean 
government has generally respected the human rights of its citizens, however, reported 
human rights problems include: societal discrimination against women, persons with 
disabilities and minorities; domestic violence and rape, child abuse, and trafficking in 
persons.  The South Korean National Security Law: (a) has vague rules regarding arrest 
and detention; and (b) permits imprisonment for up to seven years for conduct that falls 
under a vague legal standard of “endangering the security of the State. The State 
Department has indicated it is difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners in 
South Korea. 
 
Although the 1950 invasion of South Korea by North Korean forces ended in 
1953 with the establishment of a Demilitarized Zone, a peace treaty never has been 
signed.  Noting that South Korea and North Korea legally remain in a state of war, the 
U.S. Department of State warns “the possibility of military hostilities that could 
necessitate the evacuation of U.S. citizens from the Republic of Korea cannot be 
excluded.” 
 
For almost 20 years after the Korean War, relations between South Korea and 
North Korea were minimal and very strained.  In 1991, relations between South Korea 
and North Korea improved with the South-North Basic Agreement, which acknowledged 
that reunification was the goal of both governments. But, divergent positions on the 
process of reunification, the North Korean weapons programs, and South Korea’s 
tumultuous domestic politics have contributed to a cycle of warming and cooling of 
relations between South Korea and North Korea. South Korea’s “Sunshine Policy,” a 
policy of engagement with North Korea, has been cited by the U.S. Ambassador to 
South Korea as one of the present challenges to U.S.-South Korean relations. 
 
3 The contents of the South Korea section are taken from Exs. I through XI. 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
 
Under the 1953 U.S.-Republic of Korea Mutual Defense Treaty, the United 
States maintains a substantial military presence in South Korea.  After 1998, South 
Korean public opinion became critical of the U.S. military presence in South Korea, and 
polls since January 2004 have found that more South Koreans view the United States 
as a bigger threat to South Korea than North Korea. There has been increasing anti-
American sentiment in South Korea, including anti-American demonstrations in 2002 
and 2006. 
 
Industrial espionage is intelligence-gathering “conducted by a foreign 
government or by a foreign company with direct assistance of a foreign government 
against a private U.S. company for the purpose of obtaining commercial secrets. This 
definition does not extend to activity of private entities conducted without foreign 
government involvement . . . .” Industrial espionage is not limited to targeting 
commercial secrets of a merely civilian nature, but rather can include the targeting of 
critical technologies and classified U.S. information. Foreign government entities, 
including intelligence organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-
sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive U.S. technology by 
foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments or its use in military 
applications. 
 
South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. The 1996 
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook notes that South 
Korea has targeted the United States with intelligence gathering programs, and has 
centered its collection efforts on computer systems, aerospace technologies and 
nuclear technologies, and its activities have included stealing information from 
computerized databases maintained by U.S. government agencies. 
 
The 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, issued by the National Counterintelligence Center, ranks Korea as 
one of the seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage against the United States. The most recent Annual Report, 
released in 2006, states that the major collectors remain active. 
 
South Korean collection activities also are evidenced by a criminal prosecution 
linking espionage as directly involving the South Korean government. In May 1997, 
Robert Chaegon Kim, a civilian employee for the U.S. Department of Navy, Office of 
Naval Intelligence, pled guilty to “conspiracy to obtain national defense information.”  
Mr. Kim had passed classified documents to an officer in the South Korean navy, 
serving as the South Korean naval attaché to the U.S. 
 
The United States restricts the export of sensitive, dual-use technologies that can 
have civilian uses, but also can be used for military purposes or to build weapons of 
mass destruction. South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of technology 
controlled under U.S. export control laws, including: material that could be used in 
missile delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, military truck parts, and night 
vision cameras. 
 
8 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
Policies 
 
 In an evaluation of an applicant’s security or trustworthiness suitability, an 
administrative judge must consider the “Adjudicative AGs for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information” (AG(s)). The AGs include brief introductory 
explanations for each AG, and provide specific disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions. 
 
These AGs are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these AGs in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. AG ¶ 2. An administrative 
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
 Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AGs ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
  
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified [or sensitive] information 
will be resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts by “substantial evidence,”4 demonstrating, in accordance 
with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue an applicant’s access to classified information. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant 
4 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person seeking access to classified or sensitive information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. It is 
because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to such 
information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of such 
information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism.  Executive Order 10865, § 7.  
   
Analysis 
  
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
AG C (Foreign Preference) 
 
AG ¶ 9 explains the Government’s concern  “[w]hen an individual acts in such a 
way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or 
she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” 
 
 AG ¶ 10(a) indicates one condition that raises a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case stating, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.” And AG ¶ 10(a) includes two pertinent examples, “(3) Accepting educational, 
medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country . . . 
 
5“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
10 
                                         
 
 
[and] (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another 
country,” which apply in this case.   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged Applicant maintains a bank account in South Korea with an 
approximate balance of $13,000.00, which raised a concern under this AG.  AGs ¶ 
11(c), “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor” is the 
closest relevant mitigating circumstance, and it does not apply in this case.  
 
 Applicant took the affirmative step of closing this account and transferring the 
remaining balance in the amount of $15,834.17 to his U.S. bank account on June 7, 
2007. This action substantially negates the underlying basis for this concern. As noted, 
all of Applicant’s financial interests are in the U.S. The foreign preference concern will 
be further addressed in the whole person concept section of this decision. 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating, “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] 
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this AG can and should consider 
the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is 
located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country 
is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.” 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and, 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under AG B. However, if only one relative lives in a 
 
11 
                                         
 
 
foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contacts with his immediate family members, who are resident citizens of South Korea.  
His wife, who is a South Korean citizen, lives with him. He has contact to a lesser extent 
with his in-laws, who are citizens of South Korea and permanent residents of the U.S. 
These close relationships with his family members create a heightened risk of foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation because South Korea has an active collection 
program.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying 
conditions primarily as it pertains to Applicant’s parents, siblings, and travel to South 
Korea, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating 
condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a mitigating condition never 
shifts to the Government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) partially applies to Applicant’s wife and 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply to 
his relationships his in-laws. They all live in and are completely vested in the U.S. His 
contact with his in-laws is maintained vicariously through his wife and is infrequent, and 
not of great substance. AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Considering how vested Applicant, his 
wife, and in-laws are in the U.S. and the nature of their business, it is unlikely Applicant 
will be placed in a compromising position.  Also, his limited and infrequent contacts with 
his in-laws are not a security concern because it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between his-in laws and the interests of the United States.  
  
 
12 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
Appellant, however, did not establish AG ¶¶ 8(a) or 8(c) in regard to his parents 
and siblings. He did not establish “it is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of [his parents and siblings] and the interests of the 
U.S.” His frequent contacts with his family members in South Korea could potentially 
force him to choose between the United States and South Korea. He did not meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with his parents and 
siblings] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Appellant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the U.S., as he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest. He has lived in the United States 20 of his 40 years and has lived 
continuously in the United States since 2005. He became a U.S. citizen in 2001. His 
wife plans to apply for U.S., but must meet the mandatory waiting period. Applicant 
spent his formative years in the U.S. to include high school, college, and went on to 
earn two graduate degrees. His parents and siblings spent a substantial number of 
years in the U.S. and are familiar with the U.S. and the American way of life. Applicant’s 
contacts and linkage to the United States are substantial and based on his decision to 
live in the U.S. versus South Korea and divest himself from South Korea, he has 
established his linkage to the U.S. is greater than his linkage to South Korea. He is 
heavily vested in the U.S., financially and emotionally. 
   
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative AGs related to the 
whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, the 
Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”6 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve 
misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the 
eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.7 In addition to the 
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
6 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
13 
                                         
 
 
Directive ¶ E2.2.1. Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.     
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
   
I carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal connections to 
South Korea.  He lived in South Korea half of his life.  His wife is a citizen of South 
Korea. She has frequent, non-casual conversations with her family members living in 
South Korea. Applicant’s parents are citizen-residents of Korea.  Applicant traveled to 
South Korea six times since 1996. Essentially all SOR allegations are established. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant has lived in the United States for 20 of his 40 years, and he has 
been a naturalized citizen for six years. He has long ties to the U.S., his wife and all of 
her immediate family members reside in the U.S. After working briefly in South Korea, 
he chose to live and work in the U.S. with his wife versus South Korea. When he 
became a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. His wife is a 
permanent resident alien and plans to apply for U.S. citizenship when eligible. All of her 
immediate family member live in the U.S. His ties to the United States are stronger than 
his ties to South Korea. He has no financial ties to South Korea in contrast to his U.S. 
significant financial ties. In fact, he took the affirmative step of divesting himself of all 
financial ties to South Korea by closing his bank account in South Korea and 
transferring the funds to his U.S. bank account. There is no evidence he has ever taken 
any action which could cause potential harm to the United States. In fact, and most 
notably, he has successfully held a security clearance for 16 months.  
 
Applicant’s employer confidence and trust in him is so high as to warrant 
recommending him for a clearance. This was clearly demonstrated by two of his 
supervisors testifying on his behalf. Both those supervisors hold top secret clearances. 
Applicant takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and he has worked 
diligently for a defense contractor for 27 months. His supervisors, family, and friends 
assess him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, responsible, mature, and of high 
integrity. He has an excellent reputation as a friend, family member, employee and U.S. 
citizen. His witnesses and documentary evidence recommend him for a security 
clearance. No witnesses recommended denial of his security clearance or produced any 
derogatory information about him.  
 
Applicant’s family members are not, and never have been, South Korean agents. 
South Korea is a highly developed, stable, democratic republic with a modern economy 
that has dispatched troops to support the war against terrorism being led by the U.S. in 
Iraq. South Korea is a country that has been and continues to be friendly with the U.S. 
for more than 50 years. Further, there is no record evidence that South Korea has ever 
 
14 
                                         
 
 
                                                          
attempted to exploit any resident of South Korea for the purpose of compromising a 
security clearance holder in the U.S.8 
 
This case must be adjudged on his own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. Those considerations must answer the question whether there is a legitimate 
concern under the facts presented that the South Korean government or its agents 
might exploit or attempt to exploit Applicant’s immediate family members in such a way 
that this U.S. citizen would have to choose between his pledged loyalty to the U.S. and 
those family members. Or, to put it another way, is it reasonable to assume that this 
loyal ally of the U.S. might do in the future what there is no evidence to suggest it has 
ever done in the past. Applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis, 
the possibility is so remote as to be speculative.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”9 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the AGs. Applicant has 
mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is 
eligible for access to classified information.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – e.: For Applicant 
         
 
 
 
8 Noting the lack of record evidence that the South Korean government has ever engaged in such 
conduct is not to imply that the Government had any burden to present such evidence. It is intended as 
an observation, and nothing more. I make this observation merely to show my recognition that the record 
is devoid of evidence on which I could base a finding that the South Korean government has either 
engaged or not engaged in such conduct. 
 
9See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
15 
                                         
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge  
