1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-25447
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James Duffy, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 24, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), dated January
31, 2005 and resigned on August 29, 2005.  On August 15, 2007, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 21, 2007, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on October 25, 2007.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information
in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
2
FORM on September 3, 2007, and he submitted a reply that was undated, but received
by DOHA on December 3, 2007.
The case was assigned to the undersigned for resolution on December 13, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 41 years old and married.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as a Field Engineering Technician, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted to illegal drug use involving multiple types of illegal drugs,
beginning in 1984 and continuing until July 1997.  (See Government Exhibit 7).   
The Applicant began using marijuana in 1984.  He smoked marijuana twice
weekly from 1984 until July 1997.  He never purchased it because it was always given
to him.  He smoked hashish on one occasion in 1990.  He used acid (LSD) in 1989, and
a few times through 1990.  (See Government Exhibit 7).  In his response to the FORM
received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals on December 3, 2007, the
Applicant contradicts his earlier statement in Government Exhibit 7, and states that he
did not smoke marijuana twice a week from 1984 through July 1997. (See Applicant’s
Reply to FORM).      
The Applicant also used cocaine.  He first used cocaine in 1993.  He snorted in
quarterly from 1993 through 1994.  He paid between $80.00 to $100.00 per gram for the
cocaine.  Besides marijuana, hashish, acid (LSD) and cocaine, the Applicant has not
used any other illegal drug and has no future intentions of ever using any illegal drug.
He has never been arrested or counseled due to his illegal drug use.  (See Government
Exhibit 7).  
From March 1985 through August 1988, and from December 1993 through
November 1997, the Applicant possessed a security clearance while using illegal drugs.
(See Government Exhibits 13 and 14).
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
The Applicant was arrested on the charge of misdemeanor Assault and Battery in
June 1996, and not Felony Domestic Assault as alleged in the SOR.  (See Government
Exhibit 15).   
A year later, in June 1997, the Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol with a Blood Alcohol Content Above .08% in June 1997.  He and a
3
friend spent the day in Tijuana, Mexico where they shopped and drank margaritas and
shots of tequila.  The Applicant believes he had four or five drinks over several hours.
He returned to California, and made an illegal u-turn and was stopped by police.  He
was given the breathalyser and registered .08.  He pled guilty to Driving Under the
Influence and the charge of Alcohol with a Blood Alcohol Content Above .08% was
dismissed.  He was sentenced to summary probation for three years, fined $1,500.00,
required to complete a First Conviction Program and his license was suspended for 90
days.  He has satisfied all of the sentencing requirements imposed by the court and he
has not been arrested since then.    
The Applicant’s deliberate falsifications in his security clearance application,
three sworn statements to the Defense Security Service and on his answers to
interrogatories, discussed below, are violations of Title 18 of the United States Code,
Section 1001, a felony.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
his personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Applicant completed a National Agency Questionnaire dated September 21,
1992.  Question 20(a) of the application asked the Applicant if he has ever tried or used
or possessed any narcotic (to include heroin or cocaine), depressant (to include
quaaludes), stimulant, Hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP), or Cannabis (to include
Marijuana or Hashish), or any other mind-altering substances (to include glue or paint),
even one time or on an experimental basis, except as prescribed by a licensed
physician?  The  Applicant answered, “YES” and listed that he smoked marijuana
occasional/recreational use, and that his last use of marijuana was in February 1992.
He failed to list his use of marijuana, hashish, acid (LSD) and cocaine as set forth under
Guideline H above.  (See Government Exhibit 11).        
  
In a signed, sworn statement dated November 1993, before a Special Agent of
the Defense Security Service, the Applicant stated that he used marijuana about three
times per year from 1985 to February 1989.  He failed to list that he had used marijuana
approximately twice weekly from 1984 to at least July 1997.  (See Government Exhibit
10).
In a signed, sworn statement dated June 10, 1997, before a Special Agent of the
Defense Security Service, the Applicant denied using marijuana since 1992 and denied
ever using any other illegal drug.  He failed to list his use of marijuana beyond 1992 and
that he had also used hashish, acid (LSD) and cocaine as set forth under Guideline H
above.  (See Government Exhibit 9).
In a signed, sworn statement dated September 2, 1997, before a Special Agent
of the Defense Security Service, the Applicant denied using marijuana prior to 1989 and
he stated that his last use of marijuana was in 1992.  He also denied ever using any
other illegal drug.  He failed to list his use of marijuana beyond 1992 and that he had
4
also used hashish, acid (LSD) and cocaine as set forth under Guideline H above.  (See
Government Exhibit 8).
In his response to Interrogatories dated April 4, 2007, sent to the Applicant by the
Department of Defense, the Applicant indicated in the Section entitled “Drug Use: that
he used marijuana four times in January and February 1992 and ten times in July 1994
through September 1996.  He failed to list his use of marijuana beyond 1996 and that
he had also used hashish, acid (LSD) and cocaine as set forth under Guideline H
above.  (See Government Exhibit 6).
The Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions dated
January 31, 2005 and resigned on August 29, 2005.  Question 21 of the application
asked the Applicant if he has ever been charged with or convicted of any felony
offenses.  The Applicant answered, ‘NO”.  His response is truthful and accurate.  He
was not charged with Felony Domestic Assault, as alleged by the Government in the
SOR.  (See Government Exhibit 15).          
  
Based upon the evidence presented, I find that the Applicant deliberately falsified
his National Agency Questionnaire dated September 21, 1992, his sworn statements to
the Defense Security Service dated November 9, 1993, his sworn statement dated June
10, 1997, his sworn statement dated September 2, 1997, and his answers to his
interrogatories dated April 4, 2007.      
A letter of recommendation submitted by the Senior Principle Field Engineer
Technician, who is a coworker and directly responsible for assigning the Applicant his
duties, and who has known the Applicant for more than ten years, indicates that the
Applicant is responsible and trustworthy and is a valuable asset to the company.  (See
Applicant’s Response to the FORM). 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
5
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
22.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a)  Deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
6
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
7
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse, criminal conduct and dishonesty that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H), criminal conduct (Guideline
J) and dishonesty (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines J and E of the SOR.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, disqualifying conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 22(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  However, mitigating condition
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment also applies.  Applicant’s last use of
any illegal drug, be it marijuana, hashish, acid (LSD) or cocaine last occurred in 1997,
over ten years ago.  His last use of illegal drugs occurred so far in the distant past and
there is no evidence in the record to indicate otherwise.  I do not find his past use of
illegal drugs to be recent or of security significance.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.      
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, disqualifying conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  Although the Applicant’s arrests and charges by law enforcement last
occurred in 1996 and 1997, over ten years ago, he has recently lied a number of times
8
about the nature and extent of his illegal drug involvement on various Government
documents, specifically by falsifying material facts in a National Agency Questionnaire,
three sworn statements, and in his response to interrogatories during the course of his
background investigation.  By doing so, he committed violations of Title 18, United
States Code, Section 1001.
Applicant’s conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct is very troubling.  He
has not been honest with the Government in answering questions about his illegal drug
involvement.  He deliberately tried to conceal the truth about his illegal drug use.  Even
in his response to the FORM, he indicates that his previous statement, referring to
Government Exhibit 7, concerning his drug use was not true.  So much inconsistency
confirms to the Government that the Applicant’s credibility is a security concern.  There
is no reasonable excuse as to why he did not tell the truth about his drug involvement,
other than the fact that he wanted to minimize it.  It is obvious that he intentionally
concealed this information from the Government, hoping to minimize the seriousness of
the matter.  Consequently, his dishonesty with the Government concerning this matter is
unacceptable.  
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, disqualifying condition 16(a), deliberate
omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  Under Criminal Conduct, disqualifying conditions 30(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses and 30(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  The Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty of
clearance holders.  It is a negative factor for security clearance purposes when an
Applicant has deliberately provided false information about material aspects of his
personal background.  None of the mitigating factors set forth in the Directive under
Guidelines E or J apply. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
 This Applicant has not demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does not meet
the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
9
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 4 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against the Applicant.
    
Paragraph 3: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.f.: For the Applicant.
    
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
