 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-20189 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Donald L. Schense, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 29, 
2004. On November 6, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 29, 2006, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 23, 2007. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on January 
26, 2007. On January 31, 2007, the case was delayed indefinitely due to Applicant’s 
serious health problems.  On May 14, 2007, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling 
the hearing for June 12, 2007. On June 8, 2007, the hearing was cancelled due to 
Applicant’s continuing serious health problems. The administrative judge continued the 
 
2 
 
 
case indefinitely until Applicant’s health improved.  The case was transferred to me on 
June 14, 2007.  Applicant indicated he was healthy enough to attend a hearing in 
November 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 16, 2007, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 19, 2007. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) 
on January 4, 2008. The record was held open until January 3, 2008, to allow Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE C, which 
was admitted. The record closed on January 3, 2008. Based upon a review of the case 
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant is a 62-year-old resource analyst employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree in 
mathematics and a master’s degree in industrial engineering and operations research. 
(Tr at 50.) He needs six more credits to complete a master’s degree in statistics. His 
areas of expertise are mathematics, statistics, and operations research. (Tr at 73.) 
 
From approximately 1967 to 1977, Applicant worked as a statistician for the 
United States Navy.  In 1977, he accepted a job with the Air Force to work in operations 
research. He retired from federal civilian employment in 1992 at the level of GS-15. He 
worked for a contractor for a year and half.  In October 1994, he accepted a job as the 
head statistician of a state government agency in another state. His pay was the 
equivalent of a GS-15. In October 2004, he retired from the state agency. He started 
working for his current employer in November 2004. (Tr at 50-54, 58; Gov 1.) He held a 
security clearance from 1967 to 1994. He never had a security incident while handling 
classified information. (Tr at 67.)  
 
Applicant is currently married. He has been married to his wife for 37 years but 
they have been separated since 1996. They have two adult sons. Applicant lives with 
his girlfriend. He met her when he was working for the state agency. His girlfriend 
moved with him back to the state where his current employer is located. Applicant 
supports his wife and his girlfriend. Neither work. He pays his wife’s mortgage payment 
and provides her $1,000 a month. His girlfriend has been his caregiver for the past year. 
Applicant anticipates that he will file for divorce within the next year. (Tr at 71-72.) 
 
Over the past ten years, Applicant encountered significant health issues.  In 
1998, he was diagnosed with kidney failure. From 1998 through 2001, he was on 
dialysis. In March 2001, he lost his lower left leg due to complications from diabetes. In 
October 2001, he received a kidney transplant. Between 2001 and 2003, he had two 
stents put in. Shortly after he retired from the state in 2004, his kidney transplant failed. 
He has been off and on dialysis since 2005. On July 4, 2006, he had a stroke and was 
hospitalized for awhile. He has difficulty with lightheadedness and balance. He has 
 
3 
 
 
congestive heart failure. In January 2007, he had quadruple by-pass surgery. He was 
hospitalized for three months. Since leaving the hospital, he has recuperated in two 
nursing homes. He is currently on long term disability with his employer but works on 
unclassified projects at home. (Tr at 56-58.) 
 
Due to his health issues, Applicant did not work for approximately seven months 
in 2001. In 2002-2003, he worked three quarters to full-time. In 2004, he was 
hospitalized for two months, and was unable to work off and on due to health issues.  
He was also on sick leave sporadically between 1998 to 2000. (Tr at 84-86.)  
 
When Applicant filled out his security clearance application on October 29, 2004, 
he answered “No” to question 38 which reads: “Your Financial Delinquencies – 180 
Days. In the last 7 years, have you ever been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” He also answered “No” in response to question 39 which reads: “Your 
Financial Delinquencies – 90 Days. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” Question 43 allows an applicant to list additional general remarks. Applicant 
did not list anything in the general remarks section. In signing the application, Applicant 
certified his statements were true, complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge 
and belief and made in good faith. He also acknowledged that a knowing and willful 
false statement on the form could be punished under federal law. (Gov 1.)  
 
On April 18, 2006, Applicant was interviewed by a USIS investigator in 
conjunction with his background investigation.  The USIS investigator testified that she 
went through Applicant’s security clearance application (SF 86) with him “line by line.” 
The USIS investigator asked Applicant if his answers to questions 38 and 39 were 
accurate. He confirmed that the answers were correct. She did not specifically ask him 
about taxes.  The USIS investigator asked Applicant seven concluding questions. The 
questions include, “Is there anything pertinent to the investigation or anything else that 
you would simply want me to know?”; “Is there any reason for anyone to question your 
honesty and integrity?”; and “Are there any reports that will be reviewed in the course of 
the investigation or persons interviewed that would contradict anything said or provided 
in the interview today?” He answered “No” to all of those questions. (Tr at 23-26; Gov 
4.)  
 
In approximately late April 2006, Applicant’s wife was interviewed during the 
course of the investigation. She mentioned that in 2005 she had been contacted by a 
state Department of Revenue related to delinquent state income taxes. When she 
contacted Applicant about the phone call, he admitted that they were late on state and 
federal income taxes.  Although they were separated, they still filed joint income tax 
returns. Based on this information, the USIS investigator contacted Applicant to have 
him sign a release for his Internal Revenue Service (I.R.S.) records. On May 2, 2006, 
he signed the release but they did not discuss his taxes at that time. (Tr at 27-29.) 
 
Upon contacting the I.R.S., it was discovered that Applicant owed past due taxes 
for tax years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.j.)  He did not file 
his 1999 income tax return until April 22, 2006.  He did not file his 2000, 2001, 2002, 
 
4 
 
 
2003 and 2004 income tax returns until December 14, 2005. For 1999, his adjusted 
gross income was $82,764 and his taxable income was $62,214. For 2000, his adjusted 
gross income was $84,626 and his taxable income was $63,722. For 2001, his adjusted 
gross income was $86,944 and his taxable income was $64,410. For 2002, his adjusted 
gross income was $97,337 and his taxable income was $69,171. For 2003, his adjusted 
gross income was $101,054 and his taxable income was $79,542. For 2004, his 
adjusted gross income was $107,178 and his taxable income was $86,514. (Gov 5.)  He 
owed taxes for each year. The total amount of the tax debt, including late fees and 
penalties was approximately $63,954. The USIS investigator did not re-interview 
Applicant about his tax debts. (Tr at 29-31, 76; Gov 5; AE A.)  
 
Applicant was aware that he had an obligation to file his federal tax returns. (Tr at 
81-82.) He did not file the returns partially due to health issues. He got behind the first 
couple years and procrastinated. He was not well during this time period, even though 
he knows it is not a good excuse. (Tr at 83.) In his answer to the SOR, he states that he 
did not expect to owe any taxes because he had received a refund in 1998. (Answer to 
SOR.)   
 
At hearing, Applicant was asked whether he filed his state income tax returns 
during the years he did not file federal income tax returns, ie. 1999-2004. He 
responded, “Yes, because I was a state worker. I thought I should.” (Tr at 79.) He 
recalls his wife contacting him about the overdue taxes in 2005. (Tr at 80.) Shortly after, 
his son helped him prepare his tax returns. (Tr at 81).  
 
Applicant testified that he did not realize that he had debts that were over 90 to 
180 days delinquent when he filled out his security clearance application. (Tr at 59-60, 
87.) Although he had not filed his income tax returns for tax years 1999 to 2003, he 
assumed he did not owe any taxes. He was not aware of the other delinquent debts.  
(Tr at 87.)  
 
During his April 2006, interview with the USIS investigator, Applicant admits he 
answered “No” when she asked him whether he was more than 90 days and 180 days 
delinquent on any debts. He did not think he was delinquent on any debts. Under cross 
examination, he admits that he knew that he owed the I.R.S. for delinquent taxes, 
having filed his tax returns in December 2005. He initially claimed that he did not know 
what the delinquency was because they were filed after the interview with the USIS 
investigator.  When reminded by the Government counsel that he was interviewed by 
the USIS investigator four months after filing his taxes, he explained that because he 
had filed his taxes, he thought he had taken care of the debt. He did not think of 
delinquent tax debts in the same fashion as delinquent bills. (Tr at 88-90.) When asked 
about his filing his 1999 federal income tax return four days after the interview with the 
USIS investigator, Applicant claimed he did not remember. (Tr at 90.)    
 
Credit reports obtained during the investigation revealed the following delinquent 
debts: a $276 medical bill turned over for collection (SOR ¶1.a); a $125 collection 
account (SOR ¶1.b); a $346 department store account that was 180 days delinquent as 
 
5 
 
 
of March 2006; and a $792 credit account that was 120 days delinquent in June 2006. 
(Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 6.)  Applicant claims that he paid off all four debts by July or August 
2006. (Tr at 61.) He provided proof that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c (Gov 6 at 3; AE 
B at 2), and 1.d (Gov 6 at  2; AE B at 2) were paid.  Credit Reports dated May 24, 2007, 
and December 6, 2007, indicate that Applicant has approximately nine additional 
collection accounts related to medical bills. (Gov 6 at 2; AE B at 2.) During cross 
examination, Applicant admitted that the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.a was not paid. He 
thought that it was paid but is now working to track down the creditor. (Tr at 74-75.)   
 
Applicant and his wife refinanced the mortgage on their home in order to pay off 
the federal tax debt.  On October 4, 2006, Applicant paid $63,954.76 to the I.R.S. which 
resolved the federal tax debt. (Tr at 64-66, 77; AE A.) He is actively working with the 
collection agency and the hospital to resolve the medical accounts. He has 
approximately $3,500 in unresolved medical bills. (Tr at 62-63.) Aside from the medical 
accounts, his current financial situation is stable. (Tr at 70.) After deductions, Applicant 
receives $1,500 per month from his federal government pension. He receives $900 per 
month from his state government pension. (Tr at 74.)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted four character references.  The president 
and CEO of the defense contractor Applicant works for has known Applicant for ten 
years and states he is “totally responsible and diligent in all matters of holding and 
maintaining a Top Secret clearance.” He states that Applicant has been an exemplary 
employee whom he places great responsibility and trust. (AE C at 2.)  The Director of 
Business and Marketing has known Applicant since 1983.  He indicates that Applicant is 
a personal friend who is held in very high regard by his contemporaries. He plays a 
valuable role with the company and should be granted a security clearance. (AE C at 3.) 
The Assistant Facility Officer has known Applicant since 1990.  He has always found 
Applicant to be an honest, trustworthy and forthright individual. He recommends 
Applicant for a clearance. (AE C at 4.)  The Team Manager of the Missile Warning 
Team states that Applicant is a key member of his team.  The ability to use Applicant’s 
expertise would greatly accelerate the team’s efforts.  Applicant is a dependable 
member of the team and the team manager does not believe that he presents a risk if 
he is allowed to resume his work with classified information. (AE C at 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC & 19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. He incurred several delinquent debts 
over the years to include a significant federal tax debt for tax years 1999 – 2004.  
 
FC DC ¶19(f) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same) applies. Applicant admits to not timely filing 
his federal income tax returns for tax years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004. 
He failed to provide a sufficient excuse for not doing so. He testified that he filed his 
state tax returns during these years because he thought he had an obligation as a state 
employee.  He did not fully explain why he felt no obligation to timely file and pay his 
federal income tax returns. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. The 
main concern in Applicant’s case is his deliberate failure to timely file and pay his 
federal income tax returns.  He did not file federal income tax returns over a six year 
period.  He did not take steps to file his federal income tax returns until December 2005, 
one year after submitting his application for a security clearance. While Applicant paid 
off the tax debts in full in October 2006, concerns remain due to the significant period in 
which Applicant failed to file and pay his tax debts.  It appears that his motivation for 
resolving his tax debts was in order to obtain a security clearance. His actions raise 
doubts about his judgment.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part, with respect to the non tax-
related delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Many of the new debts are medical 
accounts which Applicant is actively working to resolve. His health problems have had 
some affect on his financial condition. However, his annual income increased each 
year. His medical absences did not reduce his income. As such FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given 
less weight.  
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies.  Applicant refinanced his home in order to 
resolve the tax debts and several delinquent debts. While, he could have resolved these 
debts earlier by filing and paying his federal income taxes in a timely manner, he did 
resolve the tax debt. 
 
8 
 
 
 Admittedly, Applicant’s health is a significant mitigating factor pertaining to the 
non tax-related debts. However, Applicant deliberately did not file his federal tax returns 
between 1999 to 2004.  He did not take action to file and resolve his federal tax debt 
until after being hired by the defense contractor and reapplying for a security clearance. 
Security concerns remain under financial considerations based on Applicant’s poor 
judgment regarding his federal income taxes. The financial considerations concern is 
not mitigated.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The government established a prima facie case that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his security clearance application, signed by Applicant on October 29, 2004, 
when he answered “No” in response to question 38 and question 39. Although Applicant 
claims he believed that he did not owe the federal government for taxes, he was aware 
that he failed to file federal income taxes for tax years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 
2003. His explanation that he did not consider taxes owed to be debts lacks credibility.  
Applicant is an intelligent and well-educated man who has a 30-year history as a 
statistician.  It is implausible to conclude that he believed that he would owe nothing for 
tax years 1999-2003.  
 
 Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies to Applicant’s 
omission of his delinquent tax debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.h) on his security clearance 
application. 
 
 PC DC ¶16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative) applies to Applicant’s deliberate failure to 
disclose his federal tax debts to the USIS investigator during the April 18, 2006, 
interview. On December 14, 2005, Applicant filed his federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 and 2004.  Upon filing his tax returns, he should have 
been aware that he owed the I.R.S. over $51,000 in past due taxes.  Yet, when asked 
about delinquent debts over 90 or 180 days old, he told the investigator no.  At no time 
during the interview, did he bring up the subject of taxes owed, even though he filed the 
 
9 
 
 
tax returns four months prior to the interview.  In addition, Applicant did not file his 
federal income tax return for 1999, until April 22, 2005, four days after his interview with 
the USIS investigator. The information provided to the USIS investigator was, at the 
very least, deliberately misleading. Applicant’s significant tax debts were relevant to his 
security clearance background investigation. It is likely that Applicant was aware that his 
tax debts would be an issue based on his 30 year history of holding a security 
clearance. 
 
 None of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) apply to 
Applicant’s case.  PC MC 17(a) (the individual made a prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with other 
facts) does not apply.  There is no evidence Applicant attempted to contact the USIS 
investigator to provide information about his delinquent tax debts. His first admission to 
having delinquent tax debt was in response to the SOR.  
 
 PC MC 17(b) (the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual to specifically 
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the failure to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully) does 
not apply. There is no issue as to Applicant receiving improper or inadequate advice 
from authorized personnel or legal counsel during the security clearance process.  
Although he signed an I.R.S. release a few days after he was interviewed, he was not 
forthcoming about his I.R.S. debts with the USIS investigator when she obtained the 
release.  
 
 PC MC 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply. Deliberately providing false information on a security 
clearance application and to an investigator conducting the subsequent background 
investigation are serious offenses.  Applicant’s deliberate falsifications are recent and 
raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  
 
 The remaining personal conduct mitigating conditions are not applicable to 
Applicant’s case. Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Personal 
Conduct pertaining to his deliberate falsifications during his background investigation. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 30 year 
history of holding a security clearance as well as the highly favorable recommendations 
of his co-workers and superiors. I considered his health issues and his attempts at 
resolving his delinquent debts. Questions about his judgment and reliability remain 
pertaining to his deliberate failure to file his federal income tax returns over an extended 
period of time. While Applicant has suffered from serious health problems over the past 
ten years, timely filing his federal income tax returns were within his control. His last 
minute resolution of his tax debt does not mitigate this concern. Nor does it mitigate 
Applicant’s deliberate attempt to withhold information pertaining to his delinquent tax 
debts on his security clearance application or during his background interview.  
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s cohabitation with another woman while still 
married to his wife raises additional questions about his judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility  
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph  1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph  1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
