                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-26496 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 11, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 1, 
2007, and I received the case assignment on November 16, 2007. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on November 20, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 13, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibit 
(AE) A, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
December 20, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the account number 
listed in ¶ 1.b, from “acct 6341” to “acct 6541.” There was no objection from Applicant 
and the motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old cost analyst for a federal contractor. She has a college 
degree in business administration. She married in 2003 and her husband has four 
children from a previous marriage. Three children are emancipated and he pays 
approximately $800 in child support for the remaining child. Only $300 of that amount is 
court ordered.1  
 
 In 1999, Applicant and her boyfriend (later husband) started a communications 
retail business. The business was set up as a sole proprietorship. They thought they 
could handle the business. She continued to work full time at another job and her 
husband worked full time at the business. Some of their clients were truck drivers that 
crossed over the border from Mexico. The business had customers and cash flow, but 
there were large operating expenses. Applicant stated that the changing market and the 
economic turmoil after the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001, were reasons why the 
business declined. To keep the business afloat, Applicant used credit cards to buy 
inventory, pay bills and finance the business.2 She also used them for personal 
expenses. She had good credit at the time and estimated she had approximately 20-30 
credit cards.3 She would only make minimum monthly payments on the credit cards. 
During this same period of time she was unable to pay all of her taxes, including federal, 
state and some taxes associated with the business, and accumulated approximately 
$30,000 in tax debt.4 Her pay was garnished and she completed the payments in 
November 2007. She has caught up with some of her taxes, but is still making 
installment payments for her 2005 and 2006 taxes. She owes approximately $2,000 on 
1 Tr. 82.  
 
2 Tr. 64-67. 
 
3 Tr. 55-56. 
 
4 Tr. 24-25. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
her 2005 taxes and $6,000 on her 2006 taxes. She attributes this to not having enough 
withholding taxes taken from her income.5 The business closed in December 2003. 
  
 In December 2003 Applicant was notified that she was being laid off. She 
officially stopped work in January 2004 and remained unemployed until May 2004. Her 
husband was working odd jobs, but did not have a good paying job. Applicant cashed 
out her 401k retirement account to pay her mortgage.6 In June 2004 she began work 
with her current employer as a cost analyst. She earns approximately $68,000. Her 
husband got a job in March 2005. He earns approximately $400 a month in salary and 
$1,900 in tips.7  
 
 In December 2006, Applicant was diagnosed with operable lung cancer. She was 
operated on in April 2007 and was on medical leave from her job. After the surgery she 
went through 12 weeks of chemotherapy. While she was going through her treatment 
she received disability pay for four months. The amount she received was less than her 
salary, thereby causing additional financial strain. All of her medical bills were paid for 
by her insurance. She admitted her illness did not contribute to her delinquencies, but 
delayed her ability to repay her debts.8 
 
 Applicant filed bankruptcy on January 28, 2005. The petition was dismissed on 
April 7, 2005. Applicant owns land that is worth approximately $26,000. The land has 
been in her family and she was concerned that she would lose the property if the 
bankruptcy proceeded.9 
 
 Applicant admitted she owes all of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. In 
addition, she had other delinquent debts. She has paid approximately $15,000 of some 
delinquent debts that are not listed on the SOR.10 She has paid the debt listed in SOR ¶ 
1.q.11 Applicant refinanced her home and cashed in her 401K pension plan to pay some 
of her debts. Applicant did not calculate the total amount of her delinquent debts 
because it was too overwhelming and intimidating.12 The listed delinquent debts in the 
5 Tr. 25-42. 
  
6 Tr. 68. 
 
7 Tr. 70, 79-81.  
 
8 Tr. 70-72, 76, 88. 
 
9 Tr. 42-43, 77. 
 
10 Tr. 24-25. 
  
11 Tr. 52-53, 57-59; AE A at p. 12. 
 
12 Tr. 74. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
SOR to which Applicant admitted she owes is more than $140,000. None except the 
one in SOR ¶1. q has been paid.13 
 
 Applicant and her husband gamble approximately $100 a week at the local 
casinos. Although she stated they do not go to the casino every week, she also stated 
that some weeks they gamble more, but used the amount of $100 as an average. She 
considers this their form of entertainment and she stated their gambling has not caused 
them to incur additional debts.14 
 
 Applicant believes she has the ability to repay her debts and stated she intends 
on repaying all of her delinquent debts. She believes with pay increases from her job 
and merit awards that she will be able to save $8,000 that can be used to pay some of 
her debts.15 She has not sought financial counseling and does not know how long it will 
take to repay all of her debts. She has a settlement offer from one creditor, but does not 
have the money at this time to accept it. She anticipates she will be able to pay the 
settlement offer in early 2008. She hopes to negotiate settlements with other creditors to 
reduce her delinquencies. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
13 Tr. 45-55. 
 
14 Tr. 78, 84-85. 
 
15 Tr. 60. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts), (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and (e) (consistent 
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis). 
Applicant has approximately $140,000 in primarily credit card debt. Her income to debt 
ratio is very high. Most of the debt has been delinquent for several years. Applicant has 
a history of not meeting her financial obligations and she is unable to significantly 
reduce the debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment),(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances), (c) (the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control) and (d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  
 
Applicant has approximately $140,000 in delinquent debts that remain unpaid 
and therefore are still current. Her financial problems began when she and her husband 
started a business and used credit cards to fund it when it was not making money to 
meet expenses. She attributes this failure to a business downturn and that may have 
contributed to it, they also organized it as a sole proprietorship that made them 
personally responsible for all the debts. To keep the business afloat she used credit 
cards to pay for the expenses. The business downturn was beyond their control, but she 
did not act responsibly under the circumstances. She used 20-30 credit cards to get 
money and then paid the minimum payment. This was a bad business decision that 
caused her to go further into debt. The loss of her job after the business closed 
exacerbated the situation, but was not the initial cause of it. Also her medical condition 
several years later and her reduced income thwarted her ability to start paying her 
debts, but again it was not the cause of her financial problems. Under the 
circumstances I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. I also find that AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies because some of the events that were beyond her control contributed to her 
inability to pay her debts, but were not the initial cause of the debts.  
 
Applicant does not want to file bankruptcy because she wants to protect real 
estate that she owns. She has not sought financial counseling and has never calculated 
her total debt because the amount was too intimidating. Although she testified that she 
intends to repay all of her delinquent debt she does not have a realistic viable plan to 
pay the large amount that she owes. Her intent to repay her debt may be genuine, but it 
is not a substitute for a realistic plan. She and her husband continue to gamble money 
that could be used to repay some of their debt. She chooses not to file for bankruptcy 
because she does not want to lose her real estate. It appears Applicant is unwilling to 
make the hard financial decisions associated with paying delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 
20(c) and (d) do not apply.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
7 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has substantial delinquent 
debts. She and her husband made poor financial decisions associated with their 
business. She lost her job and had serious medical issues, which reduced her ability to 
pay her debts for a period of time. However, they were not the initial cause of the 
problems. Applicant simply has too much debt and not enough income to pay it. She 
has not sought financial counseling and despite her good intentions she does not have 
a viable plan of action to pay the debt. She does not want to file for bankruptcy or sell 
her property, and continues to gamble as a form of entertainment. Considering the 
overall record of evidence, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from her financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through p:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r through v:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
Administrative Judge 
