1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06553
SSN: -------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 7,
2006. On July 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 2, 2007, and elected to have
his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the
Government’s written case on August 15, 2007. Applicant received a complete file of
relevant material (FORM) on August 22, 2007, and was provided the opportunity to file
The Government submitted seven items in support of its contentions.1
The case was originally assigned to another judge but was reassigned due to caseload considerations.2
Item 3 (Applicant’s undated answer to SOR).3
Applicant’s Response to FORM .4
Item 4 (Security Clearance Questionnaire, dated August 7, 2006).5
Item 6 (Applicant’s Response to DOHA Interrogatories, dated June 6, 2007).6
Attachment - Social Security Statements- with Applicant’s Response to FORM.7
2
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.1
Applicant submitted additional information on September 11, 2007. The case was
assigned to me on January 10, 2007.  Based upon a review of the case file, eligibility for2
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, which was undated, Applicant denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.j, of the SOR, with explanations. He also denied the factual
allegation in ¶ 2.a of the SOR.  He provided additional information to support his request3
for eligibility for a security clearance.  4
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended college
in 2005 and received a technical certification. He is married with three young children.
He has worked for his current employer since June 2006.5
In 1996, Applicant opened several credit accounts. He worked as a sheet metal
worker at the time. He purchased a home, a new truck, and acquired some loans. His
income for that year was $5,000. After a year, Applicant was laid off from his job and
collected unemployment. He obtained loans to pay his bills. Applicant sold his truck to
pay the truck loan. He continued to make house payments and payments for utilities.
His other obligations went unpaid.6
Although Applicant remained employed as a sheet metal worker from 1997 until
September 2000, his salary slowly progressed yearly from approximately $9,000 to
$15,203. In 2001, his salary dropped to $9,844. During this time period Applicant’s work
was seasonal.7
Applicant obtained more loans to cover his bills between steady employment.
However, he could not make payments on the loans and they became delinquent. He
could not afford to file for bankruptcy. He stopped using his credit cards in
approximately 2000. His credit rating was unsatisfactory at the time. He chose not to
pay anything on the delinquent accounts so that he could keep his house and pay the
utilities. He reasoned that the loan companies had insurance on the loans and charged
Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, undated).8
Item 5 (Credit Bureau Report for Applicant, dated August 24, 2006).9
Item 7 (Credit Bureau Report for Applicant, dated June 28, 2007).10
Item 6 (Personal Financial Statement, dated June 6, 2007).11
3
the accounts off. Applicant believes he does not owe any of the delinquent accounts. He
admits this was not a responsible way to handle this financial matter. Moreover,
because the accounts are over seven years old and do not appear on his recent credit
report, he firmly believes he does not have to pay them. His concern is saving money
and paying cash for things to avoid the use of credit cards. He currently has two
accounts that are in good standing.  8
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts and a tax lien from 1999. The SOR
affirms that the tax lien has been fully satisfied in the amount of $420 and Applicant
asserts that this was for his grandfather who had the same name. The total amount of
debt is approximately $20,000.  Applicant asserts that the medical account in allegation9
¶ 1.a for $57 should have been paid by his employer but he also stated that he could
pay it but has not. For several allegations, including allegations ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f,
Applicant denied owing the accounts because they are more than seven years old.
They are collection accounts and have been charged off. They total approximately
$9,400. The SOR allegation in ¶ 1.e for a medical bill of $210 was paid.  Allegation ¶10
1.g for a collection agency appears to be the same as allegation 1.b. Applicant states he
has never done business with the collection agency named in ¶ 1.g, or the creditor listed
in ¶ 1.h.
Applicant’s income steadily increased from 2002 until the present. The salary
range is $22,000 to $64,000 for 2006. Applicant worked two jobs in order to earn the
higher income. His current monthly gross income is $5,500. After monthly deductions of
$900, he has a net remainder of $2,651. He lists total assets as approximately
$67,000.11
Applicant disputed several collection accounts and is satisfied that since they do
not appear on his 2007 credit report, he does not owe them. He has not paid them
because they are not collectible and are charged off. While it may be true that a state
Statue of Limitations (SOL) may render an account more than seven years old ineligible
for litigation purposes, it does not mean the debt is no longer owed. The SOL refers to
the creditor’s right to sue in order to collect the money. The debt is not erased.
Applicant has not received any financial counseling. He did not contact his
creditors to arrange any settlements or even small payments on any of the delinquent
accounts. He is now cognizant of credit card use and pays cash for goods. His credit
rating has improved with the deletion of some of the older accounts. He is current with
his mortgage and other bills. 
4
On his August 7, 2006, security clearance questionnaire, Applicant answered
“no” to Section 28. Your Financial Delinquencies. The response indicated he was not
more than 180 days delinquent on any debt. He stated he did not respond affirmatively
because the accounts were not on his credit report and that he answered to the best of
his knowledge.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]NY doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay some
obligations for a period of time. His credit reports confirm that he has not paid the
charged off collection accounts. He does not intend to pay the debts due to the age of
the accounts. The activity for the delinquent debts ranges from 2000 until 2005. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose between about 2000 and 2001. He accumulated some
delinquent debt due to his low salary and some seasonal employment. While the
unemployment may have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does not end at that point.
The Applicant’s problems have been ongoing and he has not resolved the debts. His
inaction after being employed raise concerns about his current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of
6
the financial problems arose from his seasonal employment and lower income. He did
not act responsibly in identifying and resolving these debts. I find this potentially
mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received counseling and has not resolved
the delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement. He is now financially sound and
prepared for future contingencies. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions do
not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case his credit bureau report confirms
that he disputed some accounts and that one account was a duplicate. I conclude this
potentially mitigating condition applies in part.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of
special interest is any failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, Applicant believed he did not owe any money on his delinquent
accounts because they were old and falling off his credit report. He did not consider
them delinquent at that point in time but rather closed or charged off accounts. He did
not intentionally falsify his security clearance application. 
Under 16(a), the government established that he omitted a material fact from his
answer to Section 28. He denied that he deliberately or knowingly falsified an answer to
his security clearance questionnaire and that he answered to the best of his knowledge.
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the burden of
7
proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an
Applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence regarding an Applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission
occurred. The government has not established that Applicant deliberately falsified his
answer to Section 28. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began,
Applicant was a young man. He accumulated debt due to circumstances largely beyond
his control, including sporadic employment and low income. However, he did not act
responsibly under the circumstances. He is married and has three children. As a result,
he has focused his attention on providing a stable domestic environment for his family.
He did stop using credit cards and now pays cash for his goods. However, he has not
taken affirmative action to pay or resolve most of the delinquent debts raising concerns
about his good judgment. True, the Statute of Limitations has expired, making some
debts uncollectible. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Thus, this debt cannot be a source of improper
pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paidBit is
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security
clearance. Applicant has not resolved most of his delinquent debts and does not intend
to do so. He has not met his burden of proof in this case to overcome the government’s
case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
