1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04127
SSN: --------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) on September 20,
2005. On August 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security clearance concerns under
financial considerations (Guideline F), personal conduct (Guideline E), and criminal
conduct (Guideline J). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on October 16, 2007. I
received the case assignment on November 13, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing
on December 3, 2007, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 18,
2007. The government presented Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant testified on his
own behalf. He submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing
2
on January 4, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for security clearance access is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all allegations under paragraph 1 (financial considerations).
He admitted the three allegations under paragraph 2 (personal conduct). He also
denied the personal conduct allegations constitute criminal conduct as alleged by
paragraph 3 of the SOR.  Applicant is 40 years old and employed as an aircraft
mechanic with a defense contractor. He has held that position for the last nine years.
From 1986 until his Honorable Discharge in October 1998, he was employed by the
military. He is married with five children. He seeks a security clearance.
After serving 12 years in the military, Applicant was 28 years old when he
discovered he had a medical condition that mandated his discharge in October 1998.
He received a $400.00-medical-disability that was a critical monetary source for bill
payment while he searched for a job. In late 1998, he found a job, but had to
immediately take medical leave when his condition caused temporary blindness for
approximately a month. While on medical leave, he fell behind in his mortgage. When
he returned from leave, his mortgage was raised from $600.00 to $1,000.00 a month,
making it difficult to pay his other bills. 
In May 2000, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition (subparagraph 1.a.)
to save his house. According to GE 6, he purportedly received a Chapter 7 discharge of
his debts on October 5, 2000, although the amount of liability discharged is unknown
because there are no records. Significantly, Applicant believes all the bankruptcy
petitions were dismissed, not discharged. 
In late 2000, Applicant received foreclosure papers on his house indicating the
trustee was not receiving sufficient funds to satisfy the mortgage. He then filed a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition (subparagraph 1.b.) on December 13, 2000. The
petition was dismissed on June 22, 2001 after Applicant’s wife had to be hospitalized,
and he was required to babysit his children during her hospitalization. Applicant filed a
second Chapter 13 petition (subparagraph 1.c.) on July 10, 2001 that was dismissed
September 20, 2002 by the judge because of a filing mistake by the staff of Applicant’s
lawyer. Also, Applicant’s wife had to travel from their home on the eastern side of the
state to the local area to care for her mother who was suffering from a terminal illness.
She missed a critical court date resulting in dismissal of the second Chapter 13 petition.
On August 9, 2002 (subparagraph 1.d.), Applicant filed another Chapter 13
petition. GE 6 reflects the amount of debt declared in the petition was $149,720.82.
This petition was dismissed on October 15, 2003 when Applicant could not make the
monthly payments. His wife and children then moved to the family’s current location to
live with her parents until she was able to find a house to rent. Meanwhile, Applicant put
their house on the market. After a short period of time, he sold the house and moved to
the local area with his wife and family.
 Applicant testified the hurricane hit in 2005. I have taken official notice that the hurricane hit the area in the1
summer of the 2004. 
3
Applicant found a job just before the hurricane struck the area (circa summer
2004),  completely wrecking his house and ruining the family’s possessions. Then, he1
was laid off and had to move into emergency housing (trailer) provided by the federal
government. Living with his wife and four or five children until October 2006 in a trailer
was a real hardship for Applicant and his family. It was not long before his federal
housing settlement was overrun by criminal activity and a rodent problem that became
unbearable. 
In October 2006, Applicant moved out of the federal trailers with the help of an
affordable housing organization. After finding a house, he paid $3,000.00 down, and
began paying $1090.00 a month mortgage. Unfortunately, Applicant’s success in
keeping his mortgage current since October 2006 has meant that the listed debts have
not been paid. 
When Applicant was interviewed on December 21, 2005, his income was
$3,200.00 a month with $2,330.00 a month in expenses. Though his net remainder was
calculated to be about $870.00 a month, unanticipated bills frequently arose to deplete
the remainder. Recently, he has been removed from the flight line to the aircraft parts
section, translating to a reduction in his monthly, net pay to $2,844.00. He has not
made any payments on the listed debts. Applicant’s other debts, including his utilities
and regular expenses are also overdue to some degree. Applicant pays half of his
regular expenses in one pay period and the other half in the next pay period. The
mortgage continues to be paid on a regular basis every month. 
Applicant’s wife has not been able to work since approximately October 1998.
She suffers from a serious medical condition that prevents her from working. She
applied for disability insurance, but was rejected. Now that Applicant is earning less
than he did in December 2005, he is going to retain someone to help his wife reapply
for disability insurance. Because he is currently suffering from a blood circulation
problem in his legs, related to his primary medical condition, Applicant is having his
disability case reviewed to find out whether he is entitled to additional disability
insurance. 
The 13 past due debts in subparagraphs 1.e. through 1.q. belong to credit card
issuers, collection agencies, and medical providers. Ten of the creditors are medical
accounts. The total amount of debt is $14,775.00, with the largest delinquency
($10,992.00, subparagraph 1.e.) a car loan that was charged off in November 2000.
The debts became delinquent between 2000 and 2005. Applicant desires to pay the
delinquent debts, but is focusing all efforts on the keeping his house. 
The personal conduct allegations relate to omitted information that did not
appear on Applicant’s SCA he submitted to the government on September 20, 2005. In
response to the Section 27a. question requiring information about any bankruptcy
 Applicant answered “YES” to the Section 27b. question requiring information about repossessions or2
garnishments. In the explanation section, Applicant disclosed that the property was worth approximately
$10,000.00, and had been repossessed in January 2004 by the creditor identified in subparagraph 1.e. of the
SOR.
4
petition that was filed in the last 7 years, Applicant entered a “NO” response.  The2
negative response was provided even though GE 6 indicates he supposedly received a
Chapter 7 discharge in October 2000, and filed three Chapter 13 petitions. The
notification of foreclosure proceedings in late 2000 provided by the trustee raises doubt
about whether the first Chapter 7 discharge may have been  converted to a Chapter 13
action. Applicant denied he falsified his answer to Section 27 because he believed the
question called for completed bankruptcies. I find his explanation credible. 
In response to the Section 28a. question (any debts over 180 days delinquent in
the last 7 years) of the same SCA, Applicant answered “NO.” In response to the section
28b. question (debts currently over 90 days delinquent), Applicant answered “NO.” In
his answer, he mentioned misunderstanding, and being preoccupied with the
consequences of the hurricane and squalid life in the federal trailer park as reasons
why he did not answer the SCA questions correctly. At the hearing, he did not know
why he answered “NO” to both questions because he remembered the overdue debts
when he filled out the SCA, but intimated he was more concerned about his family’s
wretched living conditions. I find he exercised poor judgment by intentionally falsifying
the answers to both questions of Section 28.
Policies
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in demonstrating that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance. 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Financial Considerations (FC)
Failure to live within one’s means raises doubt about a person’s
trustworthiness. 
5
Personal Conduct (PC)
A lack of candor or poor judgment demonstrated during the security
investigation casts doubt on whether an applicant can dutifully comply with
security regulations. 
Criminal Conduct (CC)
Violating the law, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged or prosecuted, raises issues about a person’s judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness. 
Analysis
The concern of the FC guideline is the following: “Failure or inability to live within
one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is
disqualifying. Similarly under FC DC 19.c. , Aa history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns. Considering the circumstances under which
Applicant was required to terminate his military service and the short time between his
discharge and the filing of his first bankruptcy petition in May 2000, it is fair to conclude
he was not prepared to handle the sudden transition to civilian life with a wife and five
children. The record reveals that Applicant pursued four bankruptcy petitions between
May 2000 and March 2004. Though GE 6 clearly reflects his first bankruptcy petition
was filed under Chapter 7, there is some evidence to conclude the Chapter 7 was
actually converted to a Chapter 13. The dismissal of at least three Chapter 13 petitions
with continuing financial problems justifies application of FC DC 19.a. and 19.c. to these
facts. 
The FC guideline also includes conditions that mitigate security worthiness
concerns generated by financial difficulties. Applicant obtains limited mitigation from FC
mitigating condition (MC) 20.a., Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Though
the behavior occurred under bizarre circumstances that are unlikely to recur, there is
evidence of at least one account becoming delinquent in 2005, less than three years
ago. 
Under FC MC 20.b. Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
6
acted responsibly under the circumstances@ may apply when unforeseen events occur
that are outside a person’s control. Applicant receives substantial mitigation from FC
MC 20.b. beginning in October 1998, when he discovered his very serious illness that
necessitated his  discharge from the service. Fortunately, he was able to rely on his
disability insurance to support his wife and five children while he looked for a job in late
1998. Unfortunately, immediately after he found a job, he suffered  temporary blindness
for about a month, a byproduct of his primary illness. 
Applicant’s lack of success with his bankruptcy petitions shows how serious he
was about keeping his house, yet trying to pay back something to the delinquent
creditors. I conclude that, considering his wife’s medical problems, primarily her medical
condition that prevented her from working, and his unsuccessful efforts in seeking
bankruptcy protection from 2000 to March 2004, he acted  reasonably under the
circumstances. 
Shortly after selling his original house, Applicant moved to the local area in 2004,
and found a job. However, the hurricane destroyed his family’s house, requiring them to
quickly move to a federal trailer park on very short notice. It is fair to conclude he was
not prepared for the outrageous living conditions he would have to tolerate until October
2006.  
Though there is clearly a lack of evidence under FC MC 20.c. “the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications
that the problem is under control” and FC MC 20.d. “the individual has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” I conclude that the
cumulative impact of the medical conditions of Applicant and his wife, as well as
meteorological events well beyond their control, contributed substantially to their
inability to regain control over their financial responsibilities. The financial guideline is
resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
The personal conduct omissions occurred in September 2005. Applicant’s
negative answer to Section 27a. was clearly incorrect given the four bankruptcy
petitions he filed over a four-year period, with the last petition being dismissed less than
two years before he submitted his SCA. But, the insufficient mortgage payment that
surfaced in late 2000 suggests the Chapter 7 discharge may have actually been
converted to a Chapter 13. Further, Applicant disclosed his largest debt in his response
to Section 27b. of his SCA, when he identified the delinquent car loan account in
subparagraph 1.e. Considering the evidence as a whole, I conclude he misread the
Section 27a. question and was not trying to conceal his bankruptcies. Subparagraph
2.a. is found in Applicant’s favor. 
Subparagraphs 2.b. and 2.c. require application of PC DC 16.a. “deliberate
omission or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire to
determine security clearance eligibility.” However, the totality of the record persuades
me to find for Applicant under PC MC 17.d. “the individual has acknowledged the
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
7
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” The remorse
and contrition Applicant demonstrated at the hearing convince me he fully understands
the gravity of his dishonest conduct and will not engage in such disqualifying behavior in
the future. 
Deliberate falsifications of material information under the PC guideline may also
constitute criminal conduct under the CC guideline. CC DC 31.c. “allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
formally prosecuted or convicted” applies based on the allegation that Applicant’s
deliberate falsification also constitutes felonious criminal behavior under 18 U.S.C.
1001, even though Applicant was not formally charged. As with my finding for Applicant
under the PC guideline, I also find for Applicant under the CC guideline. Read together,
CC MC 33.a. “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment” and CC
MC 32.d. “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement” justify a favorable outcome for Applicant under the CC guideline. A bizarre
set of confluent weather and living conditions played a small part in Applicant’s
dishonest conduct in September 2005. He recognizes his poor judgment. Because I
believe he will not engage in this kind of behavior in the future, subparagraph 3 is
resolved in his favor. 
Whole Person Concept
In addition to the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I have also considered
this case under the totality of Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances, otherwise
referred to as the whole person concept. Nine adjudicative process factors make up the
whole person concept. Those factors are: “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” The ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the factors of the
whole person concept.   
I have discussed the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts
and circumstances surrounding this case. In October 1998, Applicant was 30 years old
when he was involuntarily discharged because of his medical condition. While he may
have been nine years beyond the age of adulthood when he departed the military, he
was clearly unprepared for transition to civilian life and the responsibilities of raising a
family of six or seven. He accumulated debt due to circumstances largely beyond his
control. Those circumstances have included continuing medical conditions for
8
Applicant and his wife, his wife’s inability to work because of her medical condition, and
the calamitous weather event leading not only to a total loss of their possessions, but
also forcing them into intolerable living conditions in the federal trailer park. Though he
deliberately falsified the Section 28 questions about his debts, and waffled somewhat in
his written answer to the SOR, Applicant’s admission of responsibility for his isolated
dishonesty, and intention to repay his past due debt is credible and worthy of belief. For
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns triggered by
the FC, PC, and CC guidelines. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings pursuant to section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q For Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c. For Applicant
Paragraph 3 (Criminal Conduct, Guideline J): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a. For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted.
_________________
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
