                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03694 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On May 23, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 10, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 7, 
2007, and assigned it to another administrative judge. It was reassigned to me on 
November 16, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 20, 2007, and I 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 12, 2007. Department Counsel and 
Applicant’s attorney stipulated to the admissibility of the government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-W. Applicant testified and called two 
witnesses. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until December 27, 
2007, to submit additional matters. On December 18th and 26th, 2007, he submitted AE 
X-AA, without objection. The record closed accordingly. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 2007.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and has worked for a federal contractor as a data 
collector for approximately two years. Applicant grew up in an unstable environment and 
when he was approximately seven years old his parents separated. He was raised 
primarily by his father who changed jobs and moved frequently. After Applicant 
graduated from high school, he moved with his father to a new state and was employed 
for about three and a half years. He admitted that his family life while growing up was 
unsupportive and lacking in encouragement. Applicant believed he grew up without 
learning a sense of responsibility. He changed jobs to try new things. Prior to his federal 
contractor employment, he was unemployed for approximately six months and 
supported himself by using his savings and living with his girlfriend. In the past five 
years he has been unemployment 2-3 times for up to a period of four months. During 
much of this time, and even when he was employed, he did not have medical insurance 
and made poor financial decisions which contributed to his indebtedness.1 
 
 The following chart lists Applicant’s debts and their current status: 
 
DEBT NATURE & AMOUNT STATUS  RECORD 
SOR 1.a Medical-consolidated by 
collection agency with 
SOR 1.h, total $2,333. 
Payment plan 
started 12/14/07; 
$100/month. 
Tr. 44-45; AE F, 
AE Y page 1-2. 
SOR 1.b Credit Card; duplicate 
with SOR 1.g. 
Paid April 19, 2007. Tr. 49-53; Answer 
to SOR; AE L. 
SOR 1.c Credit Card, Collection 
Account, total $12,751. 
Paid settlement Oct. 
19, 2007, $4,800. 
Tr. 47-59; AE G. 
SOR 1.d Collection Account, total 
$12,768. 
Believe debt to be a 
duplicate of SOR 
1.c, but no proof. 
Tr. 59-61, 80-82. 
SOR 1.e Collection Account, total 
$22. 
Unknown account. 
Attempted to 
contact by letter to 
Tr. 61-62; AE Y 
page 5. 
                                                          
1 Tr.74-76, 89-94. 
 
3 
 
 
verify account, no 
address on credit 
report. 
SOR 1.f Collection Account, total 
$2,253. 
Paid settlement 
April 10, 2007, 
$400. 
Tr. 62-66; AE N, 
AE Y page 3; GE 
7. 
SOR 1. g Duplicate SOR 1.b. See SOR 1.b See SOR 1.b 
SOR 1. h Duplicate-consolidated 
with SOR 1.a. 
See SOR 1.a  See SOR 1.a 
SOR 1.i Collection Account, total 
$1,265. 
Paid settlement 
April 10, 2007. 
Tr. 69-70; AE M, 
AE Y page 3. 
SOR 1.j Collection Account, total 
$1,262, same as SOR 
1.l 
Paid. Tr. 71-72; AE Z, 
AE AA, GE 7. 
SOR 1.k Collection Account, total 
$91. 
Unknown creditor, 
sent letter 
requesting 
information 
12/18/2007. 
Tr. 72; AE Y page 
6. 
SOR 1.l Charged off account 
total $1,089. Same as 
SOR 1.j. 
Paid. Tr. 73; AE Z, AE 
AA. 
 
 Applicant has made changes in his life, has a stable job, is addressing his 
delinquent debts, and is acting responsibly. He is systematically paying his delinquent 
debts, negotiating settlements, and living within his means. He meets his monthly 
expenses and is attempting to save money to continue to satisfy all of his delinquent 
debts. He is not married and has no children. He has no car payments. He intends on 
using his tax refund to decrease the amount of his debts. He has never contemplated 
filing bankruptcy because he believes he is in a position to satisfy all of his remaining 
delinquent debts. He has set goals for himself and hopes to save money for the future, 
buy a house, get married, and start a family.  
 
 Two witnesses testified that they have known Applicant for 15 years and believe 
him to be an honest and trustworthy individual. They do not believe he would succumb 
to coercion or pressure from a third party.2  
 
 Applicant provided character letters from coworkers who attest to his devotion to 
his job and his commitment to the mission he is assigned. He is considered a 
professional who is dedicated and can be trusted to complete the task without 
supervision. He is often assigned the difficult jobs under extreme conditions and 
performs at the highest level. He willingly helps coworkers who may be overwhelmed. 
He is considered knowledgeable and dependable and quickly learns the task at hand. 
                                                          
2 Tr. 26-37. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant has been recognized by his superiors for his outstanding performance and is 
considered a valuable asset to the organization.3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
3 AE A, B, C, D, E, W. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 for financial 
considerations that could raise a security concern and have especially considered AG ¶ 
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and (c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Applicant had debts that remained unpaid for a substantial period 
of time that he only recently began to pay. Due to his unemployment, under 
employment and lack of medical insurance, he has been unable to pay many of these 
debts. I find both AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and especially considered (a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), (b) (the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances), (c) (the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control), (d) (the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts), and 
(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue).  
 Applicant had numerous debts that were in collection status or charged off. He 
recently settled and paid many of his delinquent debts, but others remain that he is 
working on paying or attempting to resolve. I find (a) does not apply because his 
behavior was not infrequent and he is still resolving his financial problems, and 
 
6 
 
 
therefore they are recent. Some conditions that contributed to Applicant’s financial 
difficulties were beyond his control. He was unemployed for periods of time and did not 
have medical insurance. However, Applicant also admitted that he made poor financial 
decisions that also contributed to his problems. I find (b) partially applies. No evidence 
was presented that Applicant has received or is receiving counseling for his financial 
problems. Therefore, I find (c) does not apply. Applicant has made a sustained, 
deliberate, good-faith effort to resolve and pay his delinquent debts and has made 
substantial progress. He has paid some delinquent debts, negotiated, settled and paid 
others, and written letters to resolve and determine the legitimacy of others. I find both 
(d) and (e) apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was a young man who 
was provided very little direction in his life. He had low paying jobs, no medical 
insurance, and made some poor financial decisions. He has forged a new positive 
direction in his life. He has put forth a sustained and substantial effort to pay his 
delinquent debts and has made significant progress. He is considered a valuable 
trusted coworker, who is admired by those with whom he works. He made some 
mistakes as a young man, but has learned from them and is actively taking corrective 
action. He is a productive and valuable employee. Although he had financial problems, 
he has resolved many of his debts and is committed to paying all of remaining 
outstanding debts. He estimates he has approximately $5,000 in remaining debts. 
Applicant’s actions convince me that he is not a security risk.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
Administrative Judge 
