 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03730 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and 
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 28, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing on September 8, 2007, and elected to have the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on October 18, 2007. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. 
Applicant received the FORM on October 31, 2007. As of December 10, 2007, he had 
 
2 
 
 
not responded. I received the case assignment on December 13, 2007. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 8, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a high school 
graduate. He is married and has a six-year-old daughter.1 Applicant has an extensive 
amount of delinquent debt. He admitted to all the debts listed in the SOR. There is no 
evidence that any of the debts have been paid. Individual debts are discussed below. 
 
 The credit bureau reports (CBR) of August 30, 2006 and April 9, 2007, both list a 
delinquent debt to a collection agency in the amount of $351, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Both credit reports list the date of last activity (DLA) as March 2003. The collection 
agency was assigned the debt for collection by a wireless telephone provider. In his 
interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on September 
28, 2006, Applicant stated that he would contact the wireless telephone provider and 
make payment arrangements.2 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f allege medical debts of $231 and $283. The CBR of August 
30, 2006, lists these debts as collected by a collection agency. The CBR of April 9, 
2007, does not list the name of the creditor. The CBRs list the DLA as March 2003, and 
January 2005. Applicant told the investigator that he was not sure what these accounts 
were for, but that if they were his accounts he would make arrangements to pay the 
accounts.3 
  
 Applicant purchased a motorcycle in about March 2004. His mother co-signed for 
the loan. Applicant lost his job, and his mother called the loan company and told them to 
take the motorcycle, initiating a voluntary repossession in about May 2004. The CBRs 
list a remaining balance of $5,927, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a debt to a loan company of $307. Both CBRs list this debt 
with a DLA of March 2005. Applicant told the investigator that he agreed with this 
account but could not recall who the exact creditor was. He stated he would attempt to 
contact the creditor and pay the debt.5  
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 5-7. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
 The two CBRs list a delinquent debt to a furniture store, as collected by a 
collection company, for $2,381 and $2,183. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges the debt with the lesser 
amount. The DLA for the debt to the furniture store is listed as March 2005. Applicant 
stated in his background interview that he and his mother bought furniture and he 
thought that his mother was paying on this account. He told the investigator that he 
would call his mother and check on the status of the account. He said if his mother had 
not been making payments that he would make the payments in the future.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a debt to a collection company for $997, on behalf of an 
apartment building. The DLA on the CBRs is October 2005. Applicant told the OPM 
investigator this debt was for an apartment lease he co-signed for his cousin. He stated 
he was unaware his cousin had not maintained payments, and he would contact his 
cousin and make sure the payments were made continuously and on time.7  
 
 The two CBRs list a delinquent debt to a bank in the amount of $4,408 for a 
returned check, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. The DLA is December 2005. Applicant told the 
OPM investigator that he obtained a loan and gave the proceeds to his brother so that 
his brother could complete school. He stated he placed the check in the creditor bank 
and was told that it would take three days to clear. Applicant told the investigator that 
having been made aware of the balance that he would make some type of arrangement 
to pay the creditor.8 
 
 The CBR of April 9, 2007, lists two medical debts, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.j, for $335 and $1,888. The name of the actual creditor is not listed. The DLA for both 
debts is November 2005. SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.m allege three debts to a collection 
agency, for debts of $1,437, $742, and $248. The debts are listed on the CBR of April 9, 
2007, all with a DLA of August 2005.9 
 
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) signed on May 2, 2006, and initialed on July 19, 2006. Applicant answered 
“NO’” to all the pertinent financial questions on the SF 86. Question 28a asked, “In the 
last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Question 28b 
asked, “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” In his background 
interview, Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the questionnaire. He admitted the 
two falsification allegations in the SOR. An admission to a falsification allegation is not 
absolutely binding on an Administrative Judge, particularly where there is an additional 
explanation that serves to undercut the admission.10 In this case there are no additional 
explanations in Applicant’s response to the SOR, only the words “I admit.” Applicant 
                                                          
6 Id. 
 
7 Id. 
  
8 Id. 
 
9 Item 6. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-21087 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2005). 
 
4 
 
 
submitted the SF 86 in 2006. He had a number of debts that were placed for collection 
in 2005, or earlier. He had explanations about why he did not know that certain of the 
debts were delinquent. I find that his explanations do not adequately explain his failure 
to disclose that he had delinquent debts. After considering all the evidence, including 
Applicant’s statement to the investigator and his admissions in his response to the SOR, 
I find Applicant knew he had delinquent debts when be submitted the SF 86, and that he 
intentionally falsified these two questions. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. The evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all the potential mitigating 
conditions, and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,@ AG & 20(b) Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,@ AG & 20(c) Athe person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,@ AG & 20(d) Athe individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,@ and AG & 20(e) “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
 
6 
 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant paid any of the debts as alleged in the SOR. 
He did not dispute owing any of the debts. Applicant blamed the repossession of the 
motorcycle on the loss of his job. He did not provide any information on how long he 
was unemployed. He stated that his mother did not make payments on the furniture 
they bought together and that his cousin must not have paid the rent on the apartment 
Applicant co-signed for him. These events are conditions, which if credible, could be 
considered as beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant did not explain all his debts or what 
if any affect his unemployment had on his finances. There is also no evidence that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not shown a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts, and there is no clear indication 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control. I do not find any of the mitigating 
conditions to be fully applicable.  
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
  
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Applicant’s intentional falsification of his security clearance application 
raises two disqualifying conditions. They are AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities” and AG ¶ 16(e) 
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities 
which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing.”  
 
7 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have 
considered all the potential mitigating conditions and I especially considered AG ¶ 17(a) 
“the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts,” AG ¶ 17(b) “the refusal or failure to 
cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by 
improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully,” AG ¶ 17(c) “the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(d) “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur,” and AG ¶ 17(e) “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” Applicant submitted his SF 86 in 
mid-2006. He deliberately failed to disclose significant delinquent debt. Applicant has 
not submitted sufficient credible information to establish any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of shirking 
his financial responsibilities. He intentionally provided false information on his security 
clearance questionnaire. He provided very little additional information about his job 
performance or background.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on his financial issues and personal conduct. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
