1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02879
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Shawn Kapala, Personal Representative
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge
Statement of Case
On July 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),
dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge
to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 14, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 25, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on
November 28, 2007.  A hearing was held on November 28, 2007, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant's security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
2
case consisted of five exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and 14 exhibits.
The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 7, 2007.  
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of her stipulated final judgment of marriage dissolution.
There being no objection from the Government, and good cause being demonstrated,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record.  Within the time permitted,
Applicant furnished (1) a copy of her stipulated final judgment of dissolution of marriage
and (2) a letter regarding her unsuccessful efforts to obtain a dated copy of the
bankruptcy court's lifting of its stay of her divorce proceedings. There being no objection
from the Government, and good cause being demonstrated, Applicant's post-hearing
submissions were admitted as Applicant's exhibits O and P.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have incurred numerous delinquent
debts: He is alleged to have incurred 12 delinquent medical debts exceeding
$12,000.00.  For her response to the SOR,  Applicant denied all of the listed debts.  She
explained that each of the listed debts were discharged in her completed Chapter 7
bankruptcy.  She provided explanations regarding her child support withholding order,
her income/expense chart, and character references.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married in 1990 and had two children from this marriage.  No longer
able to live with her spouse following several incidents of domestic violence attributable
to him, Applicant petitioned for divorce in December 2003 (R.T., at 44).  Her attorney at
the time advised her to cease paying her bills pending finalization of the divorce decree,
because she (according to the attorney) would be paying his bills as well (R.T., at
44-46).
Applicant followed her attorney's advice and ceased paying her bills.  With the
aid of a stay lift from the bankruptcy court (see ex. J), she was able to complete and
finalize her divorce in July 2007 (see ex. O).  Under the decree's terms, Applicant and
her husband split responsibility for their listed debts.  Each spouse, too, was awarded
individual custody of one each of their two children and assigned corresponding child
support for the child living with the other parent.   Once their respective child support
obligations were netted out, Applicant became responsible for paying net child support
to her ex-husband in the amount of $163.00 a month (R.T., at 70-71).   
3
Following her divorce, Applicant returned to school and obtained he AA degree in
2004.  She was hired as an intern in January 2005 by her current defense employer ,
and has been a full time employee with the company since June 2005.  She received a
recent promotion and a pay increase to $19.97 an hour (R.T., at 49).  Current with her
debts, she is  pursuing a B.S. degree in engineering at the state university in her
community (R.T., at 51).   She considers herself a full time student and takes 13 credits
a semester while working full time with her defense employer (R.T., at 51-52).
Because her divorce was progressing so slowly in 2004, Applicant's lawyer
suggested to her that she seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief and coordinate her divorce
efforts with her bankruptcy lawyer (R.T., at 53).  Each of her listed debts in the SOR is
covered by her bankruptcy petition (schedule F) and was discharged in bankruptcy (see
ex. I; R.T., at 61-65).  Albeit, there were several debts listed in the SOR that
represented duplicate accounts (i.e., creditors 1.d and 1.e).   Applicant completed her
required bankruptcy counseling and received her bankruptcy discharge in July 2007 (ex.
I).   
Applicant  continues to receive child support from her ex-husband, and still pays
net child support to her ex-husband ($163.00 a month net) due to the disparities in their
respective incomes (i.e., she makes more than he does).  She has paid her divorce
lawyer $1,500.00 so far and still owes him $1,700.00 (R.T., at 71).  She paid her
bankruptcy attorney one lump sum payment of $1,500.00 in full discharge of her fee
obligations for her bankruptcy (R.T., at 71).
Applicant is highly regarded by supervisors and coworkers familiar with her work.
She is described by her shift supervisor as a professional caring coworker who has
gained the respect and confidence of all of those who come in contact with her (see ex.
G).  Her coworkers characterize her  as a hardworking, dedicated technician  who is an
asset to her customers and her team (ex. G).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying" (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
4
Financial Considerations
"The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts ").
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant is an electronics technician provider for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts during her marriage that ended in divorce in
July 2007.  These  delinquent debts (12 in all that exceeded $12,000.00) were
eventually apportioned between Applicant and her ex-husband in their divorce decree
and were subsequently discharged in Applicant's bankruptcy.  Because Applicant's
5
liability remained joint and several for these debts (notwithstanding apportionment of the
debts in the divorce decree), she could effectively discharge her legal responsibility for
the debts only by paying them herself (in the event her ex-spouse did not), or seek
protection through a discharge in bankruptcy (as she did).  Because of their recency,
however, Applicant's debts raise initial security concerns.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially overextended
that he or she is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant's
accumulation of delinquent debts, which heretofore she has not been in a position to
address, warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for financial considerations: and DC 19(a) ("inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts") and .DC 19(c)  ("a history of not meeting financial
obligations").
Extenuating circumstances are associated with the advice she received from her
attorney about stopping payment of her debts while awaiting the outcome of her
bankruptcy.  Extenuating, too, are Applicant's limited income from her entry position and
the extra burdens imposed on her as a single parent and student.   Her income and
expense records reveal that she is meeting her current expenses and debts with her
current income sources following her bankruptcy discharge, and no longer has any
significant debts.  MC 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline ("the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation, and the individual acted responsibility") has some applicability to
Applicant' situation.  For the most part, her financial history reflects a young single
parent struggling to better herself with enhanced educational skills.
 With her limited income and relatively high expenses as a single parent,
following her initiation of divorce proceedings in 2003, Applicant has not been in a
position to make either individual or collective progress (such as use of debt
consolidation) on her listed debts.  Faced with no viable alternatives, she petitioned for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in 2004 and received her discharge in July 2007.
Considering the extenuating circumstances of Applicant's accumulated debts, the trust
she inspires in her work, and  her now completed efforts to discharge her debts through
Congressionally approved bankruptcy procedures, Applicant essentially eliminates  risks
of having to generate funds by both legal and illegal means to pay her debts. 
Applicant's documented Chapter 7 discharge is enough to justify application of
two of the mitigating conditions to her financial situation.  MC 20(d) of the guidelines for
financial considerations ("the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts") and MC 20(d) ("the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control")  have some beneficial application to Applicant's
situation in this case.
6
Holding a favorable security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access information covered by clearance
eligibility requirements is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder
of the clearance. 
Based on her documented divorce decree and Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge
of her old debts and the whole person level of trust she has demonstrated in fulfilling her
responsibilities at work, gaining college credits, and caring for her family as a single
parent, Applicant is able to convincingly demonstrate the level of overall personal
accountability and responsibility necessary to mitigate the Government's security
concerns.
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant's debt accumulations, the positive judgment and trustworthiness impressions
she has made on her friends and colleagues, and her current bankruptcy discharge of
her listed debts, she mitigates security risk concerns related to her debts.   Favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the financial
considerations guideline.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions and guidelines listed above, this Administrative Judge makes the following
formal findings:
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras . 1.a through 1.n: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          __________________________
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
