1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-02756
SSN: ---- -- ---- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On July 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F, E, and
J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 30, 2007, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on August 31,
2007. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 30, 2007, and I
received the case assignment on November 15, 2007 after the case was transferred
from another administrative judge. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 21,
2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 11, 2007. During the
Applicant submitted 25 exhibits. He later withdrew three (Exhibits Q, W, and Y).1
In the last 7 years, have you ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?2
Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?3
2
hearing, I received nine government exhibits, 22 Applicant exhibits,  and Applicant’s1
testimony. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 2007.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except SOR
subparagraphs 1.i through 1.m.
Applicant is a 55-year-old man with two adult children. He has been married for
more than 30 years. He has a high school education. Since 1973, he has worked as a
security guard.
Throughout Applicant’s marriage, his wife has struggled with disabling health
problems that have prevented her from working (Tr. 49). Her condition worsened in
2001. Over the next three years, she was hospitalized for ten months. Before then, she
had primary responsibility for managing the family finances. Afterwards, Applicant
managed them, and gradually lost control.
At or about the time Applicant’s wife’s health worsened, his sick, elderly brother
moved in with them (Tr. 51). Insurance covered most of the wife’s medical expenses,
and the brother’s retirement pension covered his medical expenses (Tr. 73). As
Applicant grew increasingly preoccupied with caring for his family members, his debts
increasingly fell behind.
By 2007, he had accrued approximately $24,000 of delinquent debt. SOR
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g, 1.i, and 1.k through 1.m are credit card delinquencies.
SOR subparagraph 1.h is a delinquent loan, and SOR subparagraph 1.j is a delinquent
medical bill.
Applicant satisfied SOR subparagraphs 1.j (Exhibit G) and 1.m (Exhibit S, Tr.
43). He has not satisfied the remainder. At the hearing, he denied all of the remaining
debt, alleging that his brother and/or his wife had incurred them (Tr. 67). He offered no
evidence supporting this contention.
Applicant failed to disclose his delinquent debt in response to security clearance
application Questions 38  and 39.  When asked about these omissions at the hearing,2 3
he reiterated the debts were not his responsibility.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur4
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem5
is being resolved or is under control.
The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.6
The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problems7
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,8
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to this guideline is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline includes several potentially disqualifying conditions. Here, the
applicable ones are AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,@AG &
19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations, and AG ¶ 19(e), consistent
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness,
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.
The guideline also includes several potentially mitigating conditions, addressing
issues such as, among other things, the cause of the indebtedness, efforts toward debt
resolution, whether the applicant has enrolled in debt management counseling, and the
applicant’s current financial status (see generally, AG ¶ 20). Here, Applicant’s financial
problems are ongoing, rendering AG ¶ 20(a)  inapplicable. He has only satisfied two4
delinquent debts, collectively less than $600. He has neither established a good-faith
basis supporting his dispute of the debts, sought financial counseling, nor developed a
payment plan. AG ¶¶ 20(c) , 20(d) , or 20(e)  do not apply. Although his financial5 6 7
problems were caused by his preoccupation with his family members’ serious health
problems, his failure to act responsibly under the circumstances renders AG ¶ 20(b)8
inapplicable.
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal9
history statement, or similar form use to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits
or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.10
5
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Also, “[o]f special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate
with the security clearance process” (Id.).
Applicant’s omission of relevant financial information from his SF 86 triggers the
issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a)  applies. His credibility was irrevocably undermined when9
at the hearing, he recanted, without explanation, his SOR admissions. I conclude
Applicant falsified his SF 86 by omitting relevant financial information. AG ¶ 16(a)
applies without mitigation.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Moreover, “[b]y its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations” (Id.).  
Applicant’s SF 86 falsification constitutes a crime under 18 U.S.C. § 1001. AG ¶
31 (a)  applies. I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 10
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
6
Applicant accrued $24,000 of delinquent debt between 2001 and 2007. Although
they were caused, in part, by his inability to manage his finances after his wife’s health
worsened in 2001, he has made minimal efforts at satisfying or otherwise resolving
them. Instead, he chose to omit them from his security clearance application. Evaluating
this case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant remains a
security risk.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k - 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.m: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
