                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04439 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 25, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On August 22, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 28, 2007. On September 
7, 2007, he answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 18, 2007, Department Counsel prepared 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, and mailed Applicant a 
complete copy on October 23, 2007. Applicant received the FORM on October 29, 
2007, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. On November 8, 2007, Applicant submitted a letter that I marked Applicant 
Exhibit (AE 1) and admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel.  
On December 21, 2007, I received the case assignment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.f of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 28 years old and single. In May 2001, he graduated from a 
prestigious university with a Bachelor of Science in Engineering. In September 2001, he 
began working as a software engineer for his current employer, a federal contractor. In 
April 2006, he submitted an SF 86. (Item 4). 
 
 In December 2006, a government investigator interviewed Applicant regarding 
disclosures he made in the SF 86 about his drug use. Applicant admitted that he used: 
marijuana at least twenty times from November 2000 to August 2003; ecstasy two to 
three times from February 2001 to December2002; mushrooms twice from April 2001 to 
February 2006; LSD two to three times from August 2001 to December 2004; cocaine 
about twenty-five to thirty-five times from about May 2002 to December 2003; and 
methamphetamine at least three times from June 2003 to October 2003, at home, and 
once in 2006 while traveling in a foreign country to visit a friend. (Item 5; AE 1). 
 
 During the interview, Applicant stated that he “was probably dependent on 
[cocaine] but he isn’t now.”  (Id. at 3). He has no intention of using drugs in the future. 
He did not receive any substance abuse counseling or engage in rehabilitative 
measures. (Id. at 4). In his letter of November 8, 2007, Applicant included a signed 
statement of his intention not to use drugs again, with the caveat that if he violated his 
pledge, his security clearance would be revoked immediately. (AE 1 at 4).  
 
 Applicant also noted in his recent letter that he purchased a house in April 2003, 
paid off his student loans ahead of schedule, has no criminal record, maintained his job 
with above average performance ratings, and voluntarily disclosed his substance abuse 
in the SF 86 and to his family, friends and employer. He no longer associates with those 
friends with whom he used drugs. He also stopped drinking alcohol entirely.  (Id. at 1 
and 2).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and; (2) inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug 
abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction. 
Based on Applicant’s admissions that he used illegal drugs from approximately 
2000 until December 2006, the Government raised a potentially disqualifying condition 
under AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse (see above definition).” 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation.  I 
considered two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 that may be potentially applicable 
to the disqualifying condition:  
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and, 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude that AG ¶ 
25(a) does not apply. Applicant used illegal drugs from 2000 until December 2006. His 
usage was frequent and occurred with his friends, the last incident being about a year 
 
5 
 
 
ago while traveling out of the country. Given his six-year history of significant drug use, 
an asserted year of abstinence is insufficient to trigger application of this condition. His 
past behaviors do cast doubt on his trustworthiness and good judgment.   
Applicant stated he no longer associates with his friends that use drugs. He also 
signed a statement that he would agree to an automatic revocation of his clearance 
should it be determined that he used drugs in the future. Those facts warrant the limited 
application of AG ¶ 26 (b) “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,” 
as noted by his (1) “disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts,” and (4) “a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”  
Without independent evidence to corroborate his dissociation from former friends or an 
established system to monitor his decision not to use drugs (if given a clearance), full 
application of this condition is not warranted.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. In evaluating the 
conduct of the applicant, the Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 28-year-old man, who 
began using drugs frequently in college and continued using them past graduation, 
including while employed with his current employer, a federal contractor, and seemingly 
after he completed his SF 86.  While I find his articulated accomplishments over the 
past couple years commendable, along with his honesty and statements that he does 
not intend to use drugs in the future helpful, I am not convinced that he mitigated his six-
year history of drug abuse. Without independent corroboration from an appropriately 
credentialed health care provider and/or other sources, documenting Applicant’s 
assertions that he is drug free, I am concerned there is a strong likelihood that he will 
use drugs in the future. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
