  
  
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04606 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas M. Abbott, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 22, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on November 5, 2007, and reassigned to me on November 28, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 28, 2007, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on December 17, 2007, at Woodland Hills, California. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 4, 2008. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
  
  
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Stipulation 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant stipulated to the admissibility of government 
exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A through T, and the exhibits were 
admitted. The stipulation was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) XII.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant’s counsel did not object. The request and the 
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as 
HE I through XI. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in Iran. 
Applicant was sent to Europe for school in 1974, at about 16 years of age. In 1978 or 
1979, Applicant flew from Europe to the U.S. to visit his sister who lived here. His sister 
sponsored him to remain in the U.S. He attended college and graduate school in the 
United States, and has a Bachelor of Science degree and two Master of Science 
degrees from American universities. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1987.1 
 
 Applicant’s wife was also born in Iran. He met her while she was attending an 
American university. They married in 1991. She became a U.S. citizen in 1996. They 
have a ten-year-old son and an eight-year-old daughter, both born in the U.S. Neither 
child speaks Farsi, or has ever been to Iran.2 
 
 Applicant’s father passed away in Iran in about 1992. His father was a business 
owner with no connection to the Iranian government. Applicant’s Iranian passport had 
expired and he did not return to Iran for his father’s funeral. He was concerned that Iran 
might require him to perform military service. His mother is about 89 or 90 years old. 
Applicant is unsure of her birth date. She is a citizen and resident of Iran. She lives in a 
multi-story house that her husband left her. She has tenants in the building and receives 
rent from them. Applicant does not provide her economic support. She has never visited 
Applicant in the U.S. Applicant has returned to Iran twice since he left in 1974, in 1995 
and 1998. Those are the only two occasions Applicant has seen his mother in more 
than 33 years. He speaks with her on the telephone about four times a year.3  
 
 Applicant was the youngest of four brothers and four sisters. There are six 
remaining children, counting Applicant. The sister he stayed with when he first came to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14-16, 45-47; GE 1, 2; AE O. 
 
2 Tr. at 22-25; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-30, 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
  
  
3
the United States was a naturalized U.S. citizen. She died of cancer in 1998. She left 
two children who were both born in the U.S. A brother died in Iran in about 2002. His 
three remaining sisters and one brother reside in the U.S. Two of his sisters are U.S. 
citizens; one sister and one brother are permanent residents.4 
 
 Applicant has one sibling residing in Iran, his brother who is about five years 
older than Applicant. His brother works in a private industry in Iran. To Applicant’s 
knowledge, this brother has never worked for the Iranian government. Applicant has 
seen this brother twice in more than 30 years, once when he returned to Iran in 1995, 
and again in 1998. Applicant and this brother do not get along, as this brother beat 
Applicant when they were children. This brother called Applicant about six or seven 
times in 2006. Applicant believes his brother was looking for some type of absolution for 
the abuse he heaped on Applicant as a child. Other than those calls, Applicant has had 
very little contact with his brother. Applicant estimates with the exception of the 
occasions in 2006, he has spoken to his brother only four or five times in the last 20 
years. They last spoke in 2006.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother and brother in Iran do not know what he does for a living or 
that he applied for a security clearance. Only one of his siblings knows that he applied 
for a security clearance. His sister, who is an American citizen, helped Applicant 
compile the family data for his security clearance application.6  
 
 Applicant’s wife’s parents are divorced. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
His wife’s step-father is a native-born U.S. citizen. Her siblings are in the United States. 
Her father resides in Iran, but she has no communication with him.7  
 
 Applicant considered himself solely a U.S. citizen after he was naturalized, 
believing that constituted a renunciation of his Iranian citizenship. Iran continued to 
consider him an Iranian citizen. He renewed his expired Iranian passport in about 1993, 
in anticipation of returning for a visit to Iran. Applicant consulted the U.S. State 
Department, which recommended that he not travel to Iran on a U.S. passport, as the 
U.S. passport could be confiscated and he could be arrested. This is consistent with the 
advice in the State Department’s Consular Information Sheet, as discussed below.8 He 
returned to Iran in 1995, for a trip to pay respects to his deceased father. Applicant 
stayed at his mother’s house and also saw his brother and one sister on the trip. He 
was sick for most of the trip and did not feel that this gave him the closure that he 
desired. He renewed his Iranian passport and returned to Iran again in 1998. He once 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30-34, 38-42; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-37, GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
7 Tr. at 57-58. 
 
8 Tr. at 49, AE T; HE II. 
 
  
  
4
again stayed at his mother’s house and saw his brother and sister. Applicant did not 
have a clearance at the time, but he reported both trips to his company.9  
 
 Applicant does not plan on returning to Iran. He did not go to Iran for his brother’s 
funeral in 2002. He has no intention to return for his mother’s funeral when she passes 
away. His Iranian passport expired in 2003, and he did not renew it.10 In about 2006, 
Applicant discovered that under the policy in place at the time that he could not possess 
a foreign passport and obtain a security clearance.11 Applicant called a DoD number for 
clarification on what to do about the expired Iranian passport. He was told that he 
should go to the American Embassy. Applicant stated he was already in the U.S., and 
asked if he could just have someone witness him destroy the passport. The person told 
him not to do that as the passport could come in handy some day. Applicant realized 
that the person was not knowledgeable in this area and contacted the Iranian Interests 
Section of the Pakistan Embassy. He was told to return the passport to them. Applicant 
sent the expired Iranian passport to the Pakistan Embassy on September 12, 2006, 
writing in the letter, “I am returning my Iranian passport as I no longer need it and am a 
single citizen of the USA.”12 On November 8, 2007, he sent another letter to the Iranian 
Interests Section of the Pakistan Embassy, stating: 
 
This is a clarification of my letter of Sept 12-2006 when I returned my 
passport to your office. The purpose of this letter is to clearly state that I 
denounce my Iranian citizenship as I am a sole citizen of the United 
States and have been for almost 20 years.13 
 
 Applicant is proud to be an American citizen. He votes in U.S. elections. He has 
substantial U.S. assets, including a house worth more than $1,000,000, with about a 
$380,000 mortgage. He and his wife have savings and investments worth about another 
$600,000. Applicant still has affection for his mother, but because he has only seen her 
twice in the last 30 years, they are not as close as a typical mother-son relationship. He 
would do nothing to jeopardize his wife and children, and “the security of the United 
States comes first above everything else.” If his mother or brother were ever threatened 
because of him, he would contact his Security Officer and the U.S. Government security 
officials. As one witness stated, “[m]y opinion is that [Applicant] wants more than 
anything to have his children and grandchildren grow up American. In my mind, that is 
the definition of a man committed to this nation.”14 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 49-52; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 54-55. 
 
11 Memorandum of August 16, 2000, by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, 
Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASDC3I) entitled “Guidance to DoD Central Adjudication 
Facilities (CAF) Clarifying the Application of the Foreign Preference Adjudication Guideline.” The so-
called “Money Memorandum” was superseded by the implementation of the revised adjudicative 
guidelines on September 1, 2006. 
 
12 Tr. at 52-54; AE A. 
 
13 AE B. 
 
14 Tr. at 44-45, 48, 56, 60-61; AE G, P-S. 
  
  
5
 
 Applicant’s counsel submitted numerous character letters on Applicant’s behalf. 
He is described as a man of integrity, a hard-working talented engineer, who is 
trustworthy, honest, law-abiding, dedicated, professional, and responsible, and a loyal, 
proud, committed U.S. citizen who should be granted a security clearance. He has 
received an excellent performance evaluation and various awards, accolades, and 
references15. 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.” The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
 Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
 Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
 Its dismal human rights record. 
 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq is also a concern. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian- 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 AE C-L. 
  
  
6
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personnel possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
7 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 7(a), Acontact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. Applicant has two family members in Iran, a 
country that is clearly hostile to the United States.16 It is considered the most active 
state sponsor of terrorism, and the government of Iran has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people. Applicant’s immediate family in Iran 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG && 7(a) and (b) have been 
raised by the evidence. 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); HE I-XI. 
 
8 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant has visited Iran and seen his elderly mother and brother twice in more 
than 30 years. He and his brother have been estranged for years, and have had 
minimal contact except for a few years ago when his brother was apparently trying to 
make amends for his actions against Applicant as a youth. He still has affection for his 
mother, but described it as less than normal because of their very limited contact. 
Neither his brother nor his mother has any association with the government of Iran. 
Applicant’s closest family is in the United States. He is most committed to his wife and 
two children. He has four siblings and their families who are American citizens or 
permanent residents. His life, career, close family, assets, and allegiance all lie in the 
United States. I find it unlikely that Applicant would ever be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of Iran or a terrorist organization and the 
interests of the U.S.  I further find there is no conflict of interest, because Applicant has 
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in America, that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG && 8(a) and 
(b) are applicable. No other mitigating condition is applicable. 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
9 
 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) applied at one point, but the passport expired in 2003, and was surrendered in 
2006. The renewal of his Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen could raise concerns 
under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Iranian citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Applicant considered himself exclusively a U.S. citizen after he was naturalized, 
believing that conferring of U.S. citizenship constituted a renunciation of his Iranian 
citizenship. Iran, however, continued to consider him an Iranian citizen. He followed 
U.S. State Department advice and renewed his Iranian passport to travel to Iran in 1995 
and 1998. He has no intention of ever returning to Iran. He surrendered his expired 
 
10 
 
 
Iranian passport to the Iranian Interests Section of the Pakistan Embassy and formally 
renounced his Iranian citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Iran. He was 
sent to Europe for school at about 16 years of age. He went from Europe to the U.S. 
without returning to Iran. He became a U.S. citizen in 1987, and his life and immediate 
family are now here. Applicant is an established, highly regarded engineer, with 
considerable U.S. ties and assets. Since Applicant left Iran more than 33 years ago, he 
has only returned twice.  He did not return to Iran in 1992, when his father passed away.  
Applicant believed the attainment and oath of becoming a U.S. citizen also served to 
renounce his Iranian citizenship. Iran felt otherwise and continued to consider Applicant 
one of its citizens. He wanted to pay respect to his deceased father, so he decided to 
look into the possibility of traveling to Iran. He followed U.S. State Department advice 
and renewed his Iranian passport to travel to Iran in 1995 and 1998, as traveling to Iran 
on a U.S. passport would be dangerous and ill-advised. The renewal of his Iranian 
passport was not because Applicant maintained a sense of loyalty or allegiance to Iran; 
it was the only viable option for Applicant to travel to Iran, and the method suggested by 
the State Department. For the first time in more than 20 years, Applicant returned to 
Iran in 1995, and visited his mother and brother. Applicant was sick most of the trip and 
did not attain the sense of closure that he was hoping for. He returned to Iran for the last 
time in 1998. He has no intention on returning to Iran for any purpose. He did not return 
in 2002 for his brother’s funeral, and he has no intention to return when his elderly 
mother eventually passes away. Applicant has only seen his mother and brother twice 
in more than 33 years. He maintains some affection for his mother, but is essentially 
estranged from his brother. When Applicant decided that he would never return to Iran, 
surrendered his expired passport, and renounced his citizenship, he was committing to 
his immediate family and his life in America. He closed the book on his past Iranian life. 
 
 
11 
 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an Applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. Iran is the most active state sponsor of 
terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. That is not a good combination. I also 
note that Applicant left Iran more than 33 years ago and only returned twice. He has 
been a U.S. citizen for more than 20 years. His wife is a U.S. citizen. Her mother, step-
father, and siblings are all in the U.S. His children were born in the U.S. and have never 
been to Iran. He has the respect of colleagues and U.S. assets of more $1,000,000. His 
mother is about 90 years old. His mother and brother have no connection to the Iranian 
government. These facts minimize any potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. Applicant was sincere, open, and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely event 
that his mother or brother were subjected to coercion or duress from the Iranian 
government or terrorist groups, I further find that with Applicant’s deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., including his uncompromising commitment to his 
country, wife, and children, that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the U.S.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his Foreign 
Influence and Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
