 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-01466 
 SSN: --------   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 17, 
2004. On July 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
November 1, 2007, and I received the case assignment on November 6, 2007. That 
same day, I granted Applicant’s request for a scheduling delay pending his receipt of 
the Government’s investigation file which he had timely requested. After receipt of the 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
investigation file, on November 14, 2007, Applicant and Department Counsel agreed to 
a hearing date of December 5, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
26, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 5, 2007. The 
government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 6, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 17, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
On November 14, 2007, Applicant agreed to a hearing date on December 5, 
2007. The hearing notice was issued on November 26, 2007. At the hearing, I advised 
Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before the 
hearing. Applicant stated he was ready to proceed, that he had sufficient time to 
prepare for his hearing, and affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice. (Tr. at 18.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 17, 2007, Applicant denied all the 
SOR allegations. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his 
demeanor and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old Senior Design Engineer. In 1972, he completed two 
bachelors’ degrees, one in electrical engineering and computer science, the other in 
philosophy of science (epistemology). He has completed two masters’ degrees. In 1984, 
he completed a master’s in business administration, and in 1987, he completed a 
master’s in computer science. Around 1989, he also participated in a PhD. program; 
however, he was unable to complete the program because of his job commitments (Tr. 
5-6).  
 
Applicant married his first wife in June 1970, and they were divorced in 
December 1973. He married his present wife in May 1974, and they have two adult 
children, ages 28 and 21. He has held the same job for the same defense contractor 
(albeit under different names) since 1993. He has had access to classified information 
at the top secret level since 1993 (Tr. 6). There is no evidence that Applicant has ever 
compromised classified information or that he has failed to comply with rules and 
regulations concerning the protection of classified information. 
 
In 2004, Applicant submitted a security clearance application requesting an 
upgrade of his top secret security clearance to have access to secret compartmented 
information (SCI). His employer wanted Applicant qualified to handle possible future 
government contracts requiring SCI access. In June 2005, as part of the security 
clearance upgrade investigation process, Applicant underwent a lifestyle polygraph 
 
3 
 
 
examination and interview. During the interview, consistent with his answers to the 
DOHA interrogatories (GE 2), Applicant admitted that: 
 
(1) Around 2002, he visited a store to have a duplicate key made. Irritated 
because of the time he had to wait for someone to cut the key and the long checkout 
lines, Applicant lost his patience and walked out of the store with the key without paying 
$1.25 for it (GE 2).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant modified his answer to the DOHA interrogatory. He 
testified he walked out of the store without paying for the key; however, he added that 
he did not keep the key, that he threw it in a garbage can located outside of the store 
(Tr. 75). He admitted he exercised bad judgment by losing his temper, leaving the store 
without paying for the key, and throwing the key in the garbage can (Tr. 44-45, 79). 
 
(2) Around 2003, he visited a scuba diving shop. While shopping, he placed 
some of the smaller items he selected, including a set of scuba mask lenses, inside of 
his motorcycle helmet along with his gloves. Applicant claimed he paid for all the 
selected items, except for the scuba mask lenses (valued at approximately $29). He 
claimed that, unintentionally, he failed to notice the lenses underneath of his gloves in 
the helmet, and did not pay for the lenses. He noticed the lenses when he tried to put on 
the gloves outside of the store. In his answer to the DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
stated that rather than return to the store, “and more than a little embarrassed,” he 
simply left without paying for the lenses (GE 2). 
 
At his hearing, Applicant modified his answer to the DOHA interrogatory. He 
testified that he was too embarrassed to go back into the store to return or to pay for the 
lenses.  Instead, he claimed he left the lenses on a ledge in the outside window of the 
store (Tr. 52). Applicant explained he is not a thief. He admitted he exercised bad 
judgment when he failed to return the lenses to the store. 
 
(3) In 2004, Applicant purchased a set of patio furniture with a value around 
$800. He also purchased one additional piece of matching furniture with a value around 
$100 to go with the set of patio furniture. During the June 2005 interview, Applicant 
stated he reviewed the receipt at the store and immediately noticed he was not charged 
for the additional item (Tr. 86-87).  
 
In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated he did not review the 
receipt until he got home, and then it became clear to him that he had not been charged 
for the additional piece of furniture. He thought about driving back to the store to correct 
the cashier’s mistake, however, he failed to do so and kept the furniture (GE 2). 
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified he was never sure whether he had been 
charged for the additional piece of patio furniture. He said his wife believed he had paid 
for it. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
(4) During his 2005 interview, Applicant told the polygraph interviewer that he 
had shoplifted approximately 20 times in the past 15 years. At his hearing, he explained 
that he had exaggerated the number of times he had shoplifted, and that he was pretty 
sure it was only about eight times (Tr. 150). He claimed he exaggerated his behavior 
during the interview for several reasons, i.e., to shock the interviewer, because he was 
angry with the interview process, and because he wanted to embellish his statements to 
please the interviewer (Tr. 102-107). He further told the interviewer he shoplifted 
because he did not want to waste his time waiting in line to pay for small items (Tr. 110).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant explained that what he meant to say to the interviewer 
was that because he was buying small items in bulk (nuts, bolt, and washers), he could 
not guarantee that he had accurately reported to the cashiers all of the items he had 
selected for purchase. 
 
(5) At his hearing, Applicant also admitted he had told the 2005 interviewer that 
he had shoplifted a $1 part from a motorcycle shop’s display. He testified, however, that 
he had not taken the part from the motorcycle shop display, but that he found the part in 
the ground outside of the motorcycle shop, and he took it knowing it was not his. 
 
Applicant was questioned at his hearing about the contradictions between his 
hearing testimony and his answers to the DOHA interrogatories (which were consistent 
with the statements he made to the 2005 interviewer). He explained that when he 
answered the interrogatories he made sure his answers were consistent with the 
answers he provided to the 2005 interviewer. He further explained that during the 2005 
interview, he was under a lot of stress, collapsed emotionally, and felt he could not 
explain his answers. 
 
During the 2005 interview, the interviewer kept telling Applicant he was indicating 
deception. Applicant testified he felt compelled to continue searching his past behavior 
for incidents that could have been causing his deception. As a result, Applicant 
disclosed all the incidents alleged in the SOR. He believed it would not have been in his 
best interest to explain or mitigate his past questionable behavior. He averred he 
exaggerated his past behavior to please the interviewer (Tr. 64-70).  
 
Applicant testified he has had an impeccable work record since 1993. He is a 
valued employee, and his excellent work performance and significant contributions have 
been recognized via excellence awards and letters of recognition (AE 1). 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. AG & 15.  
 
 During the last 15 years, Applicant shoplifted at least eight times. These incidents 
included the taking of a duplicate key with an approximate value of $1.25 in 2002; a set 
of scuba lenses with an approximate value of $29 in 2003; and, his failure to accurately 
report to cashiers all the items he had selected for purchase. Additionally, he received 
and kept furniture he had not paid for. His actions show poor judgment, unreliability, 
dishonesty, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
 In 2005, Applicant provided a statement to a government interviewer describing 
the circumstance of his shoplifting and lack of judgment. In his April 2007 response to 
DOHA interrogatories, Applicant made certain his answers were consistent with the 
statements provided in 2005. At the hearing, Applicant recanted his answers to the 
interrogatories, and provided exculpatory information not provided either during his 
2005 interview or in his answers to the DOHA interrogatories. Specifically, he claimed 
for the first time that he threw the key in a garbage can outside of the store; that he was 
too embarrassed to go back into the scuba shop to return or to pay for the lenses, but 
he left the lenses in a window ledge outside of the store; that he never reviewed his 
receipt his patio furniture receipt while in the store, and that he was now not certain 
whether he paid for the extra piece of furniture. I find Applicant’s recantation and 
testimony not credible. He tried to deny responsibility for his past behavior and 
minimized his past questionable behavior.  
 
 Disqualifying Condition (DC) ¶ 16(c): “credible adverse information in several 
adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any 
other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information;” and DC ¶ 
16(e): “personal conduct , or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing . . .”, apply. 
 
  Applicant has held a top secret security clearance for approximately 14 years. 
Except for the alleged misconduct, there is no evidence that he has engaged in any 
other misconduct or questionable behavior. Based on the available evidence, except for 
 
7 
 
 
the shoplifting incidents, Applicant has been an upstanding husband, employee, and 
citizen. Moreover, there is also no evidence to suggest Applicant does not follow rules 
and regulations pertaining to the handling of classified information.  
 
  AG & 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find that although 
Applicant’s offenses are indeed minor, his shoplifting forms a pattern of frequent 
behavior that is likely to recur, and it casts doubts on his reliability and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(d) is not applicable because Applicant has failed to take responsibility for his 
questionable behavior. At his hearing, Applicant recanted prior statements and 
minimized his behavior. His lack of candor, honesty, and credibility weigh against a 
finding that he has acknowledged his questionable behavior, and that he has taken 
positive steps to prevent its recurrence.  
 
  Concerning AG ¶ 17(e), Applicant failed to provide any evidence to show he has 
taken steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. He presented no evidence to show his family, supervisors, co-workers, and 
friends are aware of his past questionable behavior. Applicant’s recantation of his prior 
statements and his efforts to minimize his past behavior, coupled with his demeanor 
and testimony, convince me he is highly embarrassed and ashamed of his past 
behavior. As such, he is vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress to prevent 
embarrassment and ridicule. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well educated 
man. He has been successful as a husband and father. He is considered a valued 
employee who has made significant contributions working for a defense contractor. He 
has held access to classified information at the top secret level for approximately 14 
 
8 
 
 
years. There is no evidence to show Applicant has ever compromised or caused others 
to compromise classified information. 
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in his case, Applicant’s pattern of 
questionable behavior, coupled with his recantation, and his failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers at his hearing create doubts as to his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. I find that Applicant’s recent lack of candor, honesty, and credibility 
undercut his claims of successful rehabilitation. Moreover, it shows Applicant is still 
potentially susceptible to pressure or coercion in order to cover his past questionable 
judgment and his embarrassing behavior.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
