1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-09195
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 28, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 10,
2005. On August 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on September 20, 2007, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
November 1, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 8, 2007, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 17, 2007. The Government offered
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on
his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through I, without objection. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 4, 2007. I granted Applicant’s request to
2
keep the record open until January 4, 2008, to submit additional matters.  He timely
submitted Exhibit J, without objection. The record closed on January 4, 2008. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations in paragraph 1: a., b., c., e., f.,
g., and I. He denied d. and h. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 47 years old. He is married and has two children. 
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The SOR lists 9 allegations regarding financial difficulties under Adjudicative
Guideline F. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were listed
in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,632
for past due child support. Applicant testified it was as a result of a child support order
he received, he had a debt of $17,000, even though he had physical custody and was
taking care of his daughter. He further testified that he has been making payments on
this debt since 2001, and Exhibit C shows that as October 31, 2007, he had reduced the
debt to $3,603. He has made additional payments since then reducing this debt further. 
Finally, because Applicant  was providing care for his child, he testified that the
court had ordered the mother of his child to pay the arrearage for the child’s previous
support.  Exhibit J, includes a copy of a Judgment Regarding Parental Obligations,
dated December 7, 2007, in which the court ordered the mother to pay $13,688 for the
period of support of the life of the child, confirming that Applicant should not have been
the one responsible for child custody, since he was the custodial parent. The mother is
now ordered to pay Applicant $255 a month in child support plus $75 a month for
arrearage. I  find that regarding this debt, Applicant has been acting responsibly in this
difficult situation. 
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,327.
Applicant testified that he had made a payment of settlement on this debt. A credit
report, dated October 11, 2007, (Exhibit 2) shows a “settlement accepted on this
account.” The problem is that Applicant has at least two accounts to this creditor and it
is not clear what the settlement has been accepted for and what, if anything,  remains.
3
In Exhibit J, Applicant avers that he has been in contact with the credit collection agency
for these debts , but they were not helpful on what debts are still owed. Based on the
credit report, I find that at least one of the debts to this creditor is still outstanding.
1.c. This second overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$482. As discussed in 1.b., above either 1b. or 1.c. has not yet been resolved, while the
other debt has been paid. The evidence does not establish which is the outstanding
debt, in Exhibit J, Applicant indicated that he plans to re-contact the credit collector, and
resolve this issue.  
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $41. At
the hearing, Applicant testified that he had made a payment on this phone bill, and he
believed that this debt was resolved. In his post hearing submission, (Exhibit J)
Applicant said to resolve this debt he made a payment on this debt, and this debt has
now been satisfied.
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,208.
Applicant explained that this debt is to an attorney, whom Applicant hired to help him
gain custody of his daughter, during a period when he believed the child’s mother was
abusing the child. He indicated that he paid him an initial retention fee of $2,500 and
then an additional $1,000, but Applicant has disputed this bill because he believes that
this attorney did not perform the services for which was paid, including appearing in
court. Applicant testified that he is now paying $75 a month on this debt. Exhibit D
includes letters from a collection agency, showing that Applicant is paying $75 a month
for this debt and for the debts listed as 1.f. and 1.g., below.  
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,138.
This debt was for another attorney, who was employed by Applicant for the same
purpose, but whom Applicant believed also did not performs his services. The $75 a
month Applicant is paying as discussed in 1.d., above, is also for this debt. While
Applicant does not believe either attorney fulfilled his obligations to warrant being paid,
he is resolving these debt. 
1.g. This second overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$995.  This is also being resolved by the $75 a month payment. 
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $470. At
the hearing, Applicant first testified that he was not aware of whom this creditor is, so he
did not believe he owed this debt. Later during the hearing, Applicant realized who the
original creditor was, and he testified that he has paid this debt.  In Exhibit J, Applicant
indicates that he contacted the listed creditor, and he sent a copy of an accounting to
the collection agency and attached one to Exhibit J, showing that this debt had been
paid in full. I find that this debt has been resolved.  
1.i. Applicant petitioned the United States Bankruptcy Court in 1998 for a Chapter
7 Bankruptcy, in which he claimed liabilities of $8,950, and assets of $1,760. The SOR
alleges that the bankruptcy was dismissed. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he
4
believed his debts had been discharged in the bankruptcy, because he had not been
further contacted by his creditors, but he had no evidence to support his belief. A credit
report, Exhibit 4, shows that this bankruptcy was dismissed. 
Applicant cited several reasons for his financial difficulties, which will be
discussed below. He sustained a serious back injury in October 1997, which required
surgery, and kept him from being able to work from November 1998 until 2000. He was
also a single parent, and he continued paying child support. 
Applicant testified that he is not overdue on any of his current debts. He does not
own any credit cards. His wife, who is employed, is on maternity leave at this time. 
Finally, Applicant also offered into evidence four letters from individuals who
know or have known him for many years in his professional and /or private life. (Exhibit
G). They spoke in extremely laudatory terms, describing him as trustworthy, reliable and
hard working.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations
is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Under AG ¶ 19 (a), an Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), a history of not meeting financial obligations
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and was
unable to pay some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. As noted above, the
financial problems arose primarily from Applicant’s serious back injury that resulted in
6
surgery and loss of employment. Applicant  acted responsibly in continuing to take care
of his children while injured, and ultimately he has continued making an good faith effort
to resolve these overdue debts. l find this potentially mitigating condition is a factor for
consideration in this case. 
 Applicant is now more financially sound and better prepared for future
contingencies. I conclude that he has mitigated the financial concerns.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why MC (b) applies, I also find that the record evidence leaves me without
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated
the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
