 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04192 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 7, 2007. She answered 
the SOR in writing on August 23, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 12, 
2007. The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on November 7, 2007, 
and reassigned to me on November 28, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 28, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 17, 2007, 
at Woodland Hills, California. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which 
 
2 
 
 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted 
Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open 
until January 4, 2008, to submit additional matters. On January 4, 2008, she submitted 
Exhibit B, without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. The record closed on January 4, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 4, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated August 23, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations, but stated she believed the debt alleged in ¶ 1.f was a duplicate of 
the debt alleged in ¶ 1.d. She also provided additional information to support her 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is a technical 
school graduate. Applicant has held a security clearance for more than 20 years. She is 
divorced with no children. She lives with her boyfriend, who shares living expenses with 
her.1 Applicant has an extensive amount of delinquent debt. The SOR alleges six 
delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,691. There is no evidence that any of the 
listed debts have been paid. Individual debts are discussed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a judgment entered against Applicant in about July 2000, for 
$8,948. In her response to interrogatories requesting information about this debt, 
Applicant wrote “[t]rying to get itemization/information concerning this.” Applicant 
admitted to this debt, but testified she did not remember what the debt was for. It is 
listed on the credit bureau report (CBR) of February 3, 2007, but not the CBRs of June 
18, 2007, October 12, 2007, or December 17, 2007.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is for a $4,035 judgment entered against Applicant in 
about May 2001. Applicant wrote in her response to interrogatories, “[t]ried to find more 
information but unable to find account # or address.” Applicant admitted to this debt, but 
again testified she did not remember the debt. This judgment is listed on all the CBRs in 
evidence.3 
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the $5,981 debt in SOR ¶ 1.c to a company 
collecting on behalf of a bank which issued Applicant a credit card. Applicant’s last 
activity on this account was in January 2001. The debt is listed on the CBR of February 
3, 2007, but not the CBRs of June 18, 2007, October 12, 2007, or December 17, 2007.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34, 36-37; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 44-46; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-5, 9. 
 
3 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-5, 9. 
 
4 Tr. at 47; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1-5, 9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f allege two medical debts of $328 each. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a 
medical debt of $71. Applicant initially admitted to owing all the debts, but believed the 
second $328 debt was a duplicate. In her post-hearing submission, she stated she 
discovered that there were two separate debts for two visits to the same hospital. The 
debts resulted from when she fell and dislocated her elbow on the way to jury duty. She 
wrote that she provided her insurance card but should have filed for workers’ 
compensation because she “was technically an employee of the court as a juror at the 
time.” She wrote that she tried to pay the bill at the hospital the day of her hearing but 
the hospital was unable to accept payment.5 
 
 Applicant worked for a defense contractor, or its predecessor company, from 
about 1982 until she was laid off in about February 2001. She obtained her technical 
degree while unemployed. Applicant admitted that she went “a little overboard” in her 
spending before she was laid off. She was unemployed until she was rehired in about 
November 2002. She has worked for the same company since her rehire. Applicant 
withdrew $30,000 from her 401(k) retirement plan when she was laid off. This initiated 
serious tax consequences. She stated she asked for the fees, penalties, and taxes to be 
withheld in advance, and she asked to withdraw a sufficient amount that she would 
have $30,000 after the withholding of the fees, penalties, and taxes. It is unclear 
whether fees or penalties were withheld, but taxes were not withheld. Applicant’s state 
and federal tax responsibilities arising from the withdrawal from the 401(k) were 
satisfied in about 2005.6  
 
 Applicant testified that one of the reasons she has not paid the debts was that 
she was very busy at work and her first priority was her job. She frequently worked 
overtime and had a long commute. Her mother and her boyfriend have been ill, 
requiring hospital stays and operations. Additionally a family member was killed in a 
natural disaster on January 1, 2008. She stated she plans on paying her debts. She had 
an appointment with a debt consolidation company after the hearing, but was 
uncomfortable with the person and their fees and did not retain their services. She 
stated she would continue to seek a company to assist her in her debt resolution.7 
 
 Applicant has approximately $5,000 in her savings account and about $200,000 
in her 401(k). Her pay statement from June 2007, revealed $381 deducted every two 
weeks for her retirement account.8 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21-22; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-5, 9; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 22-23, 41-44; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 20, 25, 30-31; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. at 26, 34-35; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant is very involved in helping animals. She assisted a number of sick and 
injured animals over the years and took in several animals in need of rescue. This 
resulted in large veterinarian bills.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
                                                          
 
9 Tr. at 27; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated several delinquent debts and was unable or 
unwilling to pay her obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
6 
 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant currently has significant delinquent debt. She did not show proof that 
she disputed or paid any of her debts. She was unemployed for a significant period from 
2001 to 2002, but she had delinquent debt before she was laid off. Her family members 
have had medical issues. Her unemployment and the medical issues were conditions 
that were largely beyond Applicant’s control. However, she has been continuously 
employed for more than five years. She paid her IRS debt but has done virtually nothing 
to pay the listed debts. During this time period she accrued about $200,000 in her 
retirement account, plus about $5,000 in savings, while ignoring her financial 
obligations. That is not acting responsibly under the circumstances. She did not make a 
good faith effort to repay her creditors. She has made promises to begin a payment 
program, but she has not done so. There are not clear indications the financial problem 
is being resolved or is under control. Her overall conduct with her creditors casts doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Based on my evaluation 
of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude no mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was unemployed for an 
extended period from 2001 to 2002. She was unable to pay the debts she accrued 
before and during this period. However, she has been employed continuously since 
2002, and except for her debt to the IRS, has done very little to pay her debts. During 
this period, Applicant’s retirement account has grown to about $200,000. Accumulating 
a nest egg is a good thing, but not while shirking one’s financial obligations. Applicant 
accumulated personal wealth of approximately ten times the size of the delinquent debt 
she has ignored. Applicant’s displayed extremely poor judgment and her actions were 
irresponsible.  
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
