1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-07585
SSN: ------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________
Decision
______________
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge:
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that
Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on April 18,
2006.  On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA’s action was taken pursuant to Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 5, 2007. She
answered the SOR in writing on November 9, 2007, and requested that her case be
2
determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The government compiled its File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on November 20, 2007.  The FORM contained documents
identified as Items 1 through 8.  By letter dated November 27, 2007, a copy of the
FORM was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information
and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. On December 19, 2007, Applicant timely
filed a response and one exhibit which I have identified as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex.) A.
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Ex. A or her response to the FORM.
On January 3, 2008, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains 23 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial
Considerations. (SOR ¶¶I 1.a. through 1.w.) (Item 1.)  In her Answer to the SOR, dated
November 6, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.p, and
1.r through 1.w. of the SOR, explaining that she “plan[ned] to make the necessary
payment arrangements to satisfy [each] debt.” In her Answer, Applicant did not address
¶ 1.q., which alleged a $565 debt to one of her creditors. Her failure to address
allegation 1.q. in her answer to the SOR may have been inadvertent. The debt alleged
at ¶ 1.q. is listed as unpaid on Applicant’s credit report dated August 15, 2006.  (Item 5.)
Applicant submitted no credible evidence to establish that the debt had been paid or
settled.
Appellant is 25 years old and a high school graduate.  She is the mother of a
seven-year-old child.  (Item 4.)  She was granted a security clearance in March 2003.
In August 2003, she was fired from her job because of repeated tardiness.  (Item 4.)
Applicant admits responsibility for eight debts in collection status which were
unpaid as of August 22, 2007.  These debts totaled approximately $7,722.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.e; SOR ¶¶ 1.i., 1.j., and 1.k.)  She also admitted responsibility for five
charged-off debts totaling approximately $12,021, which were also unpaid as of August
22, 2007.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.m., and 1.n.)
Applicant admitted seven debts totaling approximately $1,780, which were
unpaid as of August 15, 2006.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.o., 1.p. 1.r., 1.s., 1.t., 1.u., and 1.v.)  She also
admitted a debt of $806, which was 60 days past due and not paid as of August 22,
2007.  (SOR ¶ 1.l.)  Additionally, she admitted she was responsible for a judgment for
$838, which was not satisfied as of October 15, 2007.  (SOR ¶ 1.w.)  Many of
Applicant’s debts were incurred between 2004 and 2006.  (Item 5.)
In her response to the FORM, Applicant stated she was working with a debt
consolidation and counseling firm “to repair a few items on my credit report that would
be cause for concern.”  Applicant’s Ex. A listed four debts on a form provided by a debt
consolidation and counseling firm, identified on the SOR at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.j., 1.k., and 1.m.
and totaling $13,012.  Instructions on the form requested that Applicant provide missing
account numbers for the creditors so that the firm could contact them. The form was
3
undated.  (Ex. A.)  She failed to provide evidence she has executed a consolidation plan
or made payments to any of the four creditors she listed on the form.
Applicant also stated in her response to the FORM that she planned, at some
unspecified future date, to set up payment plans with the remaining creditors.  She
stated that her debts came about “at a time of personal transition with single
parenthood, childcare and child support concerns,” events that caused her to make
unfortunate financial decisions.  She did not specify how her parental and childcare
responsibilities led to her financial delinquencies. (Applicant’s response to FORM at 1.)
Applicant provided no evidence that she had received financial counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. In addition to
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, the guidelines take
cognizance of the complexities of human behavior and are applied in conjunction with
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative
goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. The adjudicative process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.  See A G ¶
2.(c).
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. A G ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
4
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Adjudicative Guideline F, & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
& 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated multiple debts and was unable to pay her
financial obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several conditions could mitigate the security
concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial delinquency
might be resolved if it happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. (Guideline F, ¶ 20(a))  Additionally,
unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control, such as loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. (Guideline F,
¶ 20(b))  Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include evidence
the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control (Guideline F, ¶
20(c)) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
5
otherwise resolve debts. (Guideline F, ¶ 20(d).)  Applicant provided a document to show
she was consolidating her debts. However, she provided no evidence that the document
had been received by the debt consolidation company or that she had made any
payments to the four creditors listed on the document.
Applicant’s acknowledged financial delinquencies are numerous, long-standing,
and continue to the present day.  All of her financial delinquencies remain unresolved,
suggesting that the circumstances that caused these delinquencies are likely to
continue in the future, thereby casting doubt on Applicant’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  Accordingly, ¶ 20(a) does not apply as a
mitigating condition.  Applicant attributes her financial delinquencies to assuming the
responsibilities of single parenthood and child care. These facts do not of themselves
establish that Applicant’s unresolved financial delinquencies were largely beyond her
control or that she acted reasonably under the circumstances.  Nothing in the record
suggests that, before she received the SOR, Applicant contacted her creditors to
negotiate payment or settlement plans. Accordingly, I conclude ¶ 20(b) does not apply
to the facts of Applicant’s case.
Nothing in the record suggests Applicant has sought or participated in financial
counseling and the evidence strongly shows her underlying financial problems are
neither resolved nor under control.  Accordingly, I conclude that ¶ 20(c) is inapplicable.  
Applicant asserted she would pay most of her creditors at some unspecified date
in the future.  These assertions were not persuasive. Promises to take actions in the
future are not a substitute for a documented track record of remedial actions.  ISCR
Case No. 98-0188 at 3 (App. Bd. April 29, 1999.)  In determining an individual’s security
worthiness, the government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve
his or her outstanding debts at some future date.  ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App.
BD. July 12, 1999).  Accordingly, I find ¶ 20(d) does not apply in mitigation to this case.
Whole Person Concept
The revised adjudicative guidelines and the Directive require that the adjudicative
process in a security clearance case not only assess conduct under the adjudicative
guidelines, but it must also reflect a careful weighing of a number of variables known as
the whole person concept.  The factors to be considered in a whole person analysis
include the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; the frequency and
recency of the conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;  the
extent to which participation is voluntary; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other pertinent behavioral changes; the motivation for the conduct; the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and, the likelihood for continuation or
recurrence.
Applicant is a mature adult who has a history of financial over-extension. Her
history of not meeting her financial obligations and her inability to pay her debts over a
6
period of several years raises a security concern because it suggests a lack of good
faith. She has promised to pay her delinquent debts in the future, but she has not
specified when that will be. Since she has not made any payments on her debts and
has not sought consumer credit counseling or assistance in learning how to manage her
finances, Applicant has failed to demonstrate that her delinquencies will not continue to
be security concerns in the future. 
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount
concern.  Security clearance decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose
further punishment for past transgressions.  Rather, the objective of the security
clearance process is the fair-minded, common sense assessment of a person’s
trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.  Indeed, the “whole
person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of his or her acts
and omissions, including all disqualifying and mitigating conduct.  Having done so, I
conclude Applicant should not be entrusted with a security clearance.  In reaching my
decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including the appropriate factors
and guidelines in Department of Defense Directive, 5220.6., as amended.  I conclude
that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a  through 1.w: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________________
JOAN CATON ANTHONY
Administrative Judge
