1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-02411
SSN:---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Annie Traylor Briscoe, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On July 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 22, 2007, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. I received the case on November 15, 2007. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on November 21, 2007, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on December 14, 2007. During the hearing, I received five government
exhibits, and the testimony of two Applicant witnesses. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on December 20, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Although his decision to leave was voluntary, he characterized the DUI as a “career-killer” (Tr. 82).1
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is a 43-year-old
married man with one child, age 18. He and his wife have been married since 1994. His
first marriage ended in divorce in 1993.
Applicant is a high school graduate who has taken some college courses over
the years. He is a veteran of the U.S. Air Force, having served from 1991 through his
honorable discharge in 2004 (Exhibit 5). His decision to leave the Air Force was
prompted by a 2003 driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) conviction.1
Shortly after leaving the Air Force, Applicant began struggling financially. By late
2006, he had accrued approximately $40,000 of delinquent debt, including among other
things, $1,300 in delinquent court fines stemming from the 2003 DUI (SOR
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.l), $3,700 in delinquent child support payments (SOR
subparagraph 1.j), $3,500 in eviction and miscellaneous property rental dispute fees
(SOR subparagraphs 1.i and 1.s), $25,000 on two delinquent car notes (SOR
subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h), and $2,100 in delinquencies related to a time-share
property purchased before he left the Air Force (SOR subparagraphs 1.m and 1.n).
In May 2007, the government propounded interrogatories to Applicant concerning
the status of his delinquencies (Exhibit 2). In response, he stated he had either
arranged payment plans or had begun making payments. He provided no
documentation to support these contentions. At the hearing, he repeated these
contentions and again provided no documentation. He has never attended debt
counseling. All of the delinquencies remain outstanding.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.).
Here, Applicant’s financial problems trigger the applicability of AG & 19(a), “an
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,@ AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.”
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. He
has neither satisfied any delinquencies, executed any payment plans, or entered a debt
counseling program. Although the difficult transition from military to civilian life
4
contributed to his financial difficulties, and could conceivably trigger the application of
AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances,” he left the military after a DUI conviction. This
does not constitute a circumstance beyond his control. Moreover, he has not acted
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not mitigated the financial
considerations security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Applicant has longstanding delinquent financial indebtedness. I was particularly
troubled by the delinquent court-ordered debts, and his repeated failure to provide
documentation that he is satisfying some of his debts. Without a concrete debt
repayment plan, the likelihood of recurrence remains unacceptably high. Evaluating this
case in light of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant remains a security
concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
