 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    ISCR Case No. 07-01887 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 6, 
2006. On August 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On October 5, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
October 11, 2007. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on October 
15, 2007. The case was transferred to me on November 1, 2007. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on November 13, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 11, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 8, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on January 4, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open until January 2, 2008, to submit additional matters. I granted Applicant’s 
request for an extension until January 7, 2008. Applicant timely submitted AE D which 
was admitted. The record closed on January 7, 2008. Based upon a review of the case 
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
At the beginning of the hearing, the Government motioned to amend the SOR by 
withdrawing SOR ¶ 1.b.  There being no objection SOR ¶ 1.b was withdrawn. (Tr at 9.) 
All remaining SOR allegations were not renumbered.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 5, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c and denied the allegations in ¶¶1.b,1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g.   
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old systems engineer employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking to maintain his security clearance.  He has held a security 
clearance for approximately 30 years.  He served on active duty in the Air Force for 20 
years, retiring at the grade of E-5.  He has worked for the same defense contractor for 
ten years after retiring from the Air Force. He is a high school graduate but is taking 
courses in information technology with an online university. (Tr at 4-6; Gov 1.)   
 
Applicant is married. He supports his wife, a 27-year-old daughter and her seven- 
year-old daughter, and a 13-year-old son. (Tr at 15, 32-33.) He also has a 29-year-old 
son who is on active duty in the Air Force.(Tr at 49.) Applicant has always lived from 
pay check to pay check. (Tr at 55.)  His financial problems started in 2000 when his wife 
was no longer able to work due to health problems.  Applicant also has health problems. 
The medical costs made it difficult to pay their debts. His wife was denied social security 
benefits. (Tr at 15-16; Answer to SOR; see also AE C.) Applicant provided a list of his 
and his wife’s prescription medications. (AE B.) A current budget submitted during the 
hearing, indicates that Applicant pays approximately $450 monthly in medical/dental 
expenses. (AE A.) 
 
On July 18, 2005, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy. He listed total 
assets of $7,580 and total liabilities of $76,305.76. (Gov 5; Gov 6.) He made payments 
on the Chapter 13 plan for at least six months.  Applicant found it difficult paying 
expenses after making Chapter 13 payments. (Tr at 40-41.)  As a result, he converted 
his bankruptcy from Chapter 13 to Chapter 7 on February 21, 2007.  At the time of the 
filing for Chapter 7, he listed assets of $4,163 and liabilities of $96,042. (Gov 7.)  His 
dischargeable debts were discharged on June 11, 2007. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant listed three unsecured priority claims with the Internal Revenue Service 
(I.R.S.) in schedule E of the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He owed a total of $6,835 in income 
taxes for tax years, 2002, 2003, and 2004. In schedule F of the Chapter 7 bankruptcy, 
he listed five claims for federal income taxes owed for tax years 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 
and 2001.  The total amount of the taxes owed for these years was $8,850. (Gov 7.) 
The total amount of the tax debt included in the bankruptcy is $15,685.  The total 
amount of consumer debt listed in the bankruptcy is approximately $62,608.  Of that 
amount, $14,125 is a student loan account. The total amount of medical debt included 
in the bankruptcy is $19,200.03. (Id.)  Federal income tax debts and student loan debts 
are not usually discharged in bankruptcy. (See 11 U.S.C. 523(a)(1) and 11 U.S.C. 
523(a)(8).)       
 
Applicant owed income taxes for taxes 1997 – 2004 because he did not elect to 
take the deduction upfront out of his military retirement check.  When he filed his tax 
returns, he did not have the money to pay the amount of taxes owed. He made some 
payments and claims that some of the tax debts were discharged in bankruptcy. (Tr at 
30-31, 51; see also 11 U.S.C. 507(a)(8)(A).)  
 
At hearing, when asked whether he owed any money to the federal or state 
government for unpaid taxes, he replied that he will not owe any taxes until the end of 
the year. (Tr at 31.)  He anticipates that he will owe between $2,400 to $2,500.  He 
owed $2,500 for tax year 2005 and makes monthly payments but has not totally paid off 
the balance. He is not sure what the balance is. He claims that it is being automatically 
deducted from his paycheck.  He intends to enter into a payment arrangement with the 
I.R.S. for the taxes that will be due this year. He is not willing to have the taxes 
automatically deducted from his military retirement check because that is what he uses 
to pay rent. (Tr at 46.) He claims all taxes owed were discharged in the bankruptcy 
except for tax years 2004 and 2005.  He currently has a payment agreement with the 
IRS and was advised to submit a copy of the payment agreement after the hearing. (Tr 
at 51.)     
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted a copy of a paycheck dated December 24, 
2007.  The paycheck listed two garnishments.  Neither garnishment currently has 
money deducted from his paycheck. The first garnishment deducted a total of $675 for 
the year. Applicant indicated that this is the I.R.S garnishment. He claims the second 
garnishment with total of $550 deducted for the year is related to his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy.  In his explanation letter, dated January 7, 2008, Applicant claims that both 
of these payments were stopped when he converted to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (AE 
D at 1-2.) He recently took out a 401K loan in order to pay his tax debt. (Id.) However, 
he did not provide a copy of a formal payment agreement with the I.R.S. or anything 
which indicates the status of his tax debts.     
 
On February 6, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in order to update his security clearance. (Gov 1.)  A 
March 7, 2006, credit report listed numerous delinquent debts, many of which were later 
discharged in Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Gov 4.)  On July 6, 2007, another 
 
4 
 
 
credit report was obtained.  It listed the following delinquent accounts: a $65 delinquent 
phone bill (SOR ¶ 1.c); a $486 medical collection account (SOR ¶ 1.d); a $414 medical 
collection account (SOR ¶ 1.e); a $440 medical collection account (SOR ¶ 1.f) and a 
$546 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.g). (Gov 3.) 
 
Applicant provided proof that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, the $65 phone bill, 
was resolved. (Tr at 19-20; AE D at 4.) He claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.g 
are medical bills that were turned over for collection.  Applicant claims that either he or 
his wife contacted each collection agency and they have no records indicating that they 
owe anything.  He has taken no action to dispute these accounts on his credit report. (Tr 
at 25-27; Answer to SOR.)  All of these account became delinquent prior to Applicant’s 
Chapter 13 and Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Gov 3 and Gov 4.) Applicant thinks these 
accounts might have been included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy because none of the 
company’s have information indicating they owe them money. (Tr at 50.)  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and 1.e have the same account number. They 
appear to be duplicate entries of the same account. (Gov 2 at 1-18 and 1-19; Gov 3 at 
2.)  I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶1.e for this reason.  I also find for Applicant 
with respect to SOR ¶1.f which is a $440 medical account because it is listed in 
Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Gov 7 at 9; AE A at 1-19; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 5.) 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.g is an account related to an automobile loan rather than a 
medical account. (Gov 2 at 1-19; Gov 4 at 4.)  
 
Applicant’s current annual income is $52,000. In addition, he receives a monthly 
military retirement check of $1,030, and works a part-time job on the weekends that 
brings in about $500 a month. (Tr at 34-35, 47, 53.) Applicant’s current budget lists that 
he has approximately $4,530 in total monthly income.  His total monthly expenses are 
approximately $4,200, leaving him approximately $330 in discretionary income. (AE A.) 
He has one open credit card account that has a balance of $250.  The maximum on the 
account is $250.  He makes the minimal payments of $20 a month. (Tr at 27-29; AE D 
at 1.) Applicant’s health insurance policy is with a private insurance company.  When 
asked whether he uses any medical benefits he is eligible for as a military retiree, he 
claimed he had very limited benefits. He is not sure which insurance company is taking 
care of the medical bills because he never sees any of them. (Tr at 49-50.)  
 
His most recent performance appraisal which closed out on June 30, 2007, 
indicates that he meets or exceeds standards. (AE D at 5-12.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC & 19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. He has a history of not meeting financial 
obligations which ultimately resulted in his filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 
2007.  He listed approximately $96,000 in liabilities in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He 
admits that he was unable to pay much of the debt. 
 
FC DC ¶19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis) applies.  Although Applicant and his wife 
incurred medical expenses related to their health condition, the majority of the debt 
listed on his Chapter 7 bankruptcy was consumer debt, totaling $62,608.  The medical 
bills included in the bankruptcy totaled, approximately $19,200.  Applicant continued to 
accumulate debt after he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. When he filed the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, he had a negative monthly balance of $488.50 which indicates living 
beyond one’s means. (AE 7 at 19.)     
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy just six months prior to the hearing. 
Not enough time has passed to conclude Applicant is on the path of financial stability. 
Under bankruptcy law, tax debts and student loans are usually not considered 
dischargeable.  Although the Government did not allege Applicant’s tax debts and 
student loan in the SOR, they are listed in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy and raise a concern 
when considering the mitigation of Applicant’s case. He has failed to provide sufficient 
information to support that these debts were discharged in bankruptcy. Applicant’s 
budget indicates that after monthly expenses, he has $330 remaining in discretionary 
income. An unexpected expense could result in continuing financial problems. In 
addition, Applicant has been unable to pay the amount of federal income taxes owed 
since 1997. This problem could be prevented if Applicant were to change his deduction 
on his military retirement check to have the taxes deducted. Instead, every year, it is 
likely that he will have a tax debt that he owes the IRS. Questions remain about 
Applicant’s financial judgment.  
 
FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
7 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part, due to the medical 
expenses incurred as a result of Applicant and his wife’s health problems. Applicant’s 
financial situation became more troublesome in 2000, after his wife was no longer able 
to work due to her health condition.  However, I give less weight to this mitigating 
condition because I cannot conclude that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Aside from the medical bills, Applicant and his wife had a substantial 
amount of consumer debt which indicates a lack of fiscal restraint. An additional issue 
are the federal tax debts incurred by Applicant from 1997 to present. These debts could 
have been prevented by changing the deduction pertaining to his military retirement 
check.   
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply.  Applicant attended one financial counseling session one month 
prior to his hearing. Given his history of financial irresponsibility additional counseling 
would be helpful to assist him with a plan to avoid financial problems in the future. 
Although the majority of his debts were discharged in his bankruptcy, a question 
remains about the federal tax debt.  At the close of the record, the amount of taxes 
actually owed to the IRS is uncertain. I cannot conclude that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control due to the recency of the bankruptcy discharge and the fact 
that Applicant’s budget indicates that he still lives paycheck to paycheck. 
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies, in part. Bankruptcy is a legitimate way to 
resolve one’s debts. However, the burden was on Applicant to demonstrate that he has 
a plan in place to establish a track record of financial stability. It is too soon to conclude 
such, based on the fact that his expenses remain almost equal to his income. Applicant 
did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the issue pertaining to his delinquent tax 
debts.     
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
8 
 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has held a security 
clearance for the past 30 years without incident.  I have considered his military service 
and his favorable performance report.  While some of the debt was incurred due to 
circumstances beyond his control, the record does not establish that Applicant took 
preventive action to control his expenses. It is also unclear what steps he intends to 
take in the future.  Most problematic, is the ongoing issue with his federal income taxes. 
Aside from his own assertions, Applicant has provided no corroboration regarding the 
status of his past tax debts.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
