1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                       )       ISCR Case No. 07-04842
SSN:            )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on October 16,
2006. On August 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 31, 2007, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on October 25,
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 3, 2007, and the case was heard
on December 18, 2007. The government offered 4 exhibits (GE1-4). Applicant testified
on his own behalf. He offered no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing
 Applicant provided no documentation to support his claim that four of the debts belonged to his brother.1
2
(Tr.) on January 4, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 47 years old and has been employed by his employer since August
1988. He is currently a range technician. He has held a security clearance since 1989.
He seeks a Secret clearance. 
There are 14 delinquent debt allegations listed under paragraph 1 (financial
considerations) of the SOR. Applicant admitted most of the debts and/or stated that four
other debts belonged to his brother.  Applicant denied subparagraph 1.e. without1
explanation or any independent evidence to support his position. 
The 14 delinquent accounts total $19,136.00. Most of the accounts are credit
cards, and one account ($1,869.00) represents the balance due after Applicant’s car
was repossessed in 2005. Two debts were transferred for collection more than five
years ago in 2002, and four debts were transferred for collection recently in 2006. As of
the date of the hearing (December 18, 2007), Applicant had made no payment on any
of the listed debts. 
On June 15, 2007, Applicant provided information (GE 2, answers to
interrogatories) pertaining to his financial obligations. In his personal financial statement
(PFS), a form provided by the government for applicants to fill in their gross and monthly
income, monthly expenses, monthly debt, net remainder, and assets, Applicant
provided estimates of his monthly income and expenses. He indicated his gross
monthly pay was 1,438.46, his net pay was $1017.58 a month, with monthly expenses
of $400.00 in groceries, $200.00 in car expenses, and $510.50 a month in child support.
He indicated in the PFS, and in other locations of the exhibit that he was making no
payments towards the listed debts. 
In GE 2, Applicant also stated he intended to place the listed debts in a
consolidation plan to pay them off. He noted he was a single parent helping his two
daughters with their education expenses. When asked at the hearing about his
contributions for his daughters’ education, he testified he was paying $350.00 a month
to support one daughter in nursing school, and about $150.00 a month for the other
daughter in college. 
At the hearing, Applicant provided more information about his indebtedness.
While all his explanations will be reviewed, I find the primary reason he slid into financial
difficulty was a lack of management of his finances. He stated, “I think I just got lax on it
and didn’t pay attention. I make good money.” (Tr. 20) Another of his explanations was
that in August 1997, his mother and father lived with him for about six months while she
recuperated from a broken hip. Applicant was also raising three children at the time.
 These figures are different from those provided in his answers to interrogatories. (GE 2) Applicant2
provided no explanation for the discrepancy. 
3
After his parents returned to their home, he began receiving phone calls from creditors
demanding payment. He recalled telling them he would initiate repayment after the
creditors submitted verification he was responsible for the debts.
Applicant also provided more information about his earnings at the hearing. He
has been employed by his current employer for 18 years, living in a trailer on his
employer’s land without having to pay rent, or a mortgage, or utilities. He also provides
after hours security for his employer. He quoted his net earnings at about $2,000.00 a
month.  Whether his earnings from the security job are included in his monthly net2
earnings is unknown. Applicant’s monthly bills include (1) a car payment of $350.00 for
a car he recently purchased, (2) $80.00 in car insurance, (3) $500.00 in education
expense for his daughters, (4) $300.00 in groceries, and (5) a cable bill. Assuming the
cable bill is $75.00 a month, and subtracting the expenses from his net monthly
earnings, the total monthly remainder is approximately $700.00. In addition to the net
remainder, Applicant estimated he had about $10,000.00 in his retirement account. 
Applicant was aware of the delinquent debts when he filled out the SCA in
October 2006, and when he received the SOR in August 2007. In his answer to the
SOR, Applicant indicated several of the debts were the responsibility of his brother.
Those debts are identified in subparagraphs 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.h., and 1.n. of the SOR.
When asked why he accused his brother of certain debts, Applicant claims he did not
know his brother was establishing credit in Applicant’s name. No additional information
was provided. Applicant testified he intended to pay off his brother’s debts too. 
Though he has never contacted any of the creditors, he declared he would start
paying off the debts in June 2008. Applicant has never had financial counseling. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG, the
entire process is a careful thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Financial Considerations (FC)
Inability to pay bills on time places the individual debtor at risk of committing
illegal acts to generate funds. 
Analysis
Applicant’s financial problems percolated in August 1997 when his parents came
to live with him. He recalled the creditors began contacting about delinquent accounts
shortly after his parents departed. Ten years later, Applicant owes 14 creditors
$19,136.00. Some of the debts became delinquent in 2002 while others did not reach
the delinquent status until various dates in 2006. The disqualifying conditions (DC)
raised by Applicant’s overdue debts are FC DC 19.a. “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” and FC DC 19.c. “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s
accumulation of more than $19,000.00 in debt by August 3, 2007 shows an inability to
pay creditors, and also demonstrates a record of not paying debts that he voluntarily
creates. 
5
There are only two mitigating conditions (MC) potentially available for Applicant.
FC MC 20.a. “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The accumulation of four of 14
delinquent debts falling delinquent less than two years ago militates against the
applicability of FC MC 19.a. 
FC MC 19.b. “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted reasonably under the
circumstances” receives some favorable consideration based on the financial burden
Applicant confronted when he had to provide for his parents and three children.
However, the passage of nine years of uninterrupted employment provides little or no
mitigation for Applicant’s failure to pay his past due debts. 
Applicant also attributed his failure to pay the listed debt on the $500.00 a month
contribution he is making towards his daughters’ education. Applicant is to be
commended for helping his daughter’s realize their educational dreams. However, his
decision to help his daughters was his own choice, not a circumstance beyond his
control. Based on Applicant’s living accommodations that have existed for about 18
years, where he pays no mortgage or rent, no utilities or telephone, and given the
earnings and expense estimates he provided, he currently has at least a $700.00-a-
month remainder. This sizeable remainder could have been used to pay off about six of
the past due debts in one payment or a limited number of payments. Payments of some
of the smaller debts would have interposed more credibility in Applicant’s statement of
intention to satisfy the creditors. Instead, the little mitigation he does receive under FC
MC 20.b. is insufficient to meet his ultimate burden of persuasion. 
The remaining two mitigating conditions are not applicable. FC MC 20.c. “the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is not applicable
based on Applicant’ admission he has never had financial counseling. Without financial
counseling or indications of control over the problems, FC 20.c. is inapplicable. The
most effective way to show control of the problem is through payment of debts. Since
Applicant has paid none of the creditors, he gets no mitigation under FC MC 20.d. “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolved
debts.” All factual allegations under the FC guideline are resolved against Applicant. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at pages 18 and 19 of the AG: “(1) the nature, extent,
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4)
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
6
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2c., the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
The disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the FC guideline have been
evaluated in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When
Applicant’s parents came to live with him during his mother’s recuperation, Applicant
was 36 years old and living on his employer’s property with no major expenses except
his three children. Though it had to be an extra financial burden to take care of his
parents, their stay was only for a short period. Applicant had plenty of time to readjust
his lifestyle to address his creditors. Yet, he did nothing. He furnished no evidence to
even suggest a constructive change in his financial habits. While he gets credit for
providing money to help his two daughters finish school, he should have been
redirecting these funds toward payment of his overdue debt. Alternatively, he could
have applied the monthly remainder to some of the smaller debts in the SOR. Without
any documented action showing that some of the creditors have been paid or that a
plan has been set in motion to pay the creditors, Applicant’s current financial difficulties
will persist in the future. Applicant has not overcome the adverse evidence under the FC
guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                                                 
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
