 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05063 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer L. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 29, 2007. She answered 
the SOR in writing on September 10, 2007, and elected to have the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on November 6, 2007. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. 
Applicant received the FORM on November 22, 2007. As of January 8, 2008, she had 
 
2 
 
 
not responded. I received the case assignment on January 15, 2008. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, dated September 8, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR, except ¶¶ 1.a, 1e, and 1.i, which she denied. She also 
provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a 
security officer/supervisor. She is a community college graduate. She is single with no 
children.1 Applicant has an extensive amount of delinquent debt. She admitted to the 
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, 1f-1h, and 1.j-1.n. The debts are also listed on the credit 
bureau reports (CBR) in the FORM. The total amount alleged for those debts is 
$16,423.2 There is no evidence that any of those debts have been paid.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a debt of $766 to a financial institution, as collected by a 
collection company. Applicant provided documentation in her response to 
Interrogatories that she settled this debt for $388 on July 13, 2007.3  
 
 Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i, for $7,688 and $4,696 
respectively. She wrote for both allegations that she was “waiting on credit report to 
dispute the claim.” Applicant did not submit any documentation about these disputed 
debts. Both debts are listed on the three CBRs in the FORM. The CBRs include for the 
$7,688 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, that “Consumer disputes this account information.” 4   
 
 There is no information in the FORM as to how or why Applicant got into financial 
trouble. She stated in her response to Interrogatories and in her response to the SOR 
that she was contacting all her creditors to try and settle her debts one at a time.5 The 
only debt that was paid was the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 6-8. 
 
3 Item 5. 
 
4 Items 3, 6-8. 
 
5 Items 3, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. The evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all the potential mitigating 
conditions, and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,@ AG & 20(b) Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,@ AG & 20(c) Athe person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,@ AG & 20(d) Athe individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,@ and AG & 20(e) “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
 Applicant settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. There is no evidence that Applicant paid 
any of the other debts as alleged in the SOR. That is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts. She disputed two of the debts, but did not submit documentation to substantiate 
her dispute. There is no evidence as to what caused Applicant’s financial problems. Nor 
is there evidence of financial counseling. I do not find any of the mitigating conditions 
applicable.  
 
  
 
5 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of financial 
delinquencies. She settled one debt and indicated she had a plan to pay her other 
debts. She provided very little additional information about herself.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on her financial issues. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
