 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------  )       ISCR Case No. 07-01247 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 7, 2006. 
On August 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). (Item 1)  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 20, 2007.  He admitted the 
allegations under Guideline H.  He denied under Guideline E a deliberate intent to 
deceive when answering a question on his security clearance application.  He elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2) 
 
 
2 
 
 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 20, 
2007.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 6, 
2007, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions within 30 days.  He has not 
responded with additional information.  The case was assigned to me on January 28, 
2008.  Based upon a review of the case file and the pleadings, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 There are six allegations in the SOR of drug use or possession alleged under 
Guideline H.  One of the allegations is based on Applicant’s admission that he will 
continue to use marijuana in the future unless required to stop by his employer or to 
obtain a security clearance.  Allegation 2b under Guideline E (subparagraph 2.b) is 
based on the same factual circumstances as listed in allegation 1.e under Guideline H.  
The government notes in the FORM that these acts raise security issues for Personal 
Conduct under AG ¶ 16(d)1.   
 
 The essence of the security concern for Applicant is his use of marijuana.  His 
use of an illegal drug both in the present and in the future is clearly covered under the 
security concern and disqualifying conditions for Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  The 
plain language of the disqualifying condition cited by the government under Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct) is for adverse information not explicitly covered under any other 
guidelines that may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination.  In this case, 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is explicitly covered under Guideline H, and is adequate for 
an adverse determination under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).  Accordingly, the 
subparagraph 2.b allegation under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) is not appropriate, is 
dismissed, and will not be further considered. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under Guideline H.  He denied a 
deliberate falsification on his security clearance application concerning his response to 
ever being charged or convicted of an offense involving illegal drugs.  I thoroughly and 
carefully reviewed the case file and the pleadings.  I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old college graduate employed by a defense contractor as 
an associate engineer since May 2006.  He is not married.  While in college, Applicant 
was employed by another defense contractor as a co-op student employee. (Item 3)  He 
                                                          
1Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not 
be  sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information, including disruptive violent, 
or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace.” 
 
 
3 
 
is proud to use his expertise working for the defense contractor in support of national 
security.  (Item 4, at 7) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he first used marijuana in 1993 when he was seventeen.  
He admitted to continually using marijuana at least once a month since 1993.  When 
interviewed on December 1, 2006, he admitted his last use of marijuana was November 
24, 2006.  Applicant admitted to purchasing marijuana every two or three months for 
personal use.  He denied ever selling or cultivating marijuana.  He denied using any 
other illegal or controlled substance. (Item 4 at 4)  Applicant stated “I will stop using 
marijuana at any time that I am required to by my employer or in order to obtain a 
security clearance.  While I use marijuana socially and find it relaxing, it does not affect 
either my ability to perform in the workplace or to participate in society.” (Item 4 at 7) 
 
 Applicant admitted he was issued a ticket for possession of marijuana in July 
1997.  He pled no contest and was told if he had a clean record after one year, the 
charge would not appear on his record.  He believed the charge was dismissed.  He 
admitted he was charged with possession of marijuana in April 1998.  He was placed in 
a diversion program and required to perform community service and attend Narcotics 
Anonymous.  He completed the required programs and to the best of his knowledge the 
charge was expunged from his record. (Item 4 at 5)  He did not provide any documents 
showing the offenses were dismissed or removed from his records. 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 23d on his security clearance application 
asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol 
or drugs.  Applicant admits to the two arrests and charges for possession of marijuana.  
Applicant appeared in court after each offense and was placed in a type of diversion 
program for each offense.  He completed each program.  Applicant did not respond 
“yes” to the question because he thought he only had to list convictions and to the best 
of his knowledge he was never convicted of either offense. (Item 4, at 5)  He interpreted 
the question as pertaining only to criminal convictions. (Item 2). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  
Marijuana is listed as a drug in the Controlled Substance Act of 1970.  Drug abuse is 
the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
 Applicant’s admission to using and purchasing marijuana from 1993 until 
November 2006 raises Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) ¶ 25(a) (any 
drug use), and DI DC ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution).   
 
 I have considered the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) and find 
none apply.  Applicant’s last admitted use was days before his most recent interview 
which makes his use recent and frequent, therefore (DI MC) ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
 
5 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.  Applicant stated 
he intends to use marijuana in the future unless requested to stop by his employer or to 
obtain a security clearance.  This clearly shows his intent to use in the future and is not 
a demonstrated intent to stop using marijuana.  DI MC ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from drug-using associates 
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used: (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence: (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation) does not apply.  Applicant failed to 
demonstrate that he has no desire to abuse drugs in the future.  He has not even 
demonstrated that he may be on the road to such a position.  Applicant has established 
that he is a drug user with no intent to stop using drugs.  Guideline H is decided against 
Applicant. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s failure to list the charges for 
marijuana possession on his security clearance application raises security concerns 
under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate 
omission concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Applicant denied intentional falsification.  He states he answered the questions 
because he thought the question only required a yes answer for criminal convictions.  
While there is a security concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification of a 
material fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government when 
applying for a security clearance, every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement 
is not a falsification.  A falsification must be deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it 
is done knowingly and willfully.  The wording of the question is very plain that it pertains 
to both charges and convictions.  As an engineer and college graduate, Applicant can 
easily understand the extent of the question.  Applicant’s understanding that the 
question pertained only to convictions is not credible.  The available information shows 
his failure to list the drug charges was knowing and willful.  Applicant failed to establish 
he did not deliberately provide false information on the security clearance application 
with intent to deceive.  The false answer with intent to deceive is established.  I find 
against Applicant as to Personal Conduct.   
 
6 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant has 
used drugs for at least thirteen years.  He intends to stop using drugs only if directed to 
do so by his employer or for security clearance purposes. In addition, he was not 
completely truthful in providing information on the security clearance application 
concerning drug related criminal charges.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s future abuse of drugs and his judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow rules and regulations.  He has not 
established that he is suitable for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his abuse of 
marijuana.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Dismissed 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
