 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-05381
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns that arise from his long-standing
financial delinquencies and failure to disclose the same in a security clearance application
he submitted in November 2006.  
On July 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns
under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant
submitted an answer to the SOR, received by DOHA on August 28, 2007, in which he
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 The entire FORM consists of the SOR, Applicant’s answer to the SOR, a security clearance
2
application, a credit report, interrogatories that are unanswered except for a brief letter from Applicant
attached thereto, and Department Counsel’s written submission. Accordingly, the FORM reveals very little
information about Applicant or the cause of his delinquent indebtedness.  
2
admitted all Guideline F allegations and denied both Guideline E allegations. Applicant
requested a clearance decision based on the written record without a hearing.  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on
November 2, 2007, that was mailed to Applicant on November 5, 2007. Applicant was
informed he had 30 days from receipt of the documents to submit his objections or
information he wished to be considered. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM
or object to anything contained in the FORM within the time allowed him. The case was
assigned to me on January 28, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits,  I make the following findings of fact:2
Applicant is a 55-year-old man who has been employed by a defense contractor
since April 1979, currently as a quality technician. He was married in June 1971, and that
marriage ended in divorce in November 1983. He has been remarried since November
1988. Applicant has three adult children and three adult step-children. He has resided in
the same residence since November 1988.
As alleged in the SOR, and admitted by Applicant, a judgment was entered against
him in the amount of $1,459 in July 2006, on an account that was charged off in October
2004. Applicant has failed to take any action to resolve this account. Also, as alleged in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant, he has three accounts that have been submitted for
collection, totalling $10,659, and two additional accounts that have been charged off,
totalling $12,206. The collection and charge off accounts have been delinquent at least two
years or more. Additionally, Applicant owned a timeshare that was foreclosed on in
November 2004.
Applicant failed to disclose any of the delinquent accounts in an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) he executed and submitted on or
about November 29, 2006, in response to questions inquiring about debts that were then
more than 90 days past due or had been more than 180 days past due in the preceding
7 years. Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing the debts was that his wife took care of
paying all bills and he was unaware he had any delinquent debts. Applicant stated in his
response to the SOR that his delinquent indebtedness was due to his failure to live within
his means. His only plan to pay off the indebtedness is from an inheritance he expects to
receive when his father-in-law dies.        
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10
3
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon
the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the
factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence
of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations), and Guideline E (personal conduct) with their respective DC and MC, are
most relevant in this case.   
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence ,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
12
4
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to11
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant has six debts, totalling over $24,000, that have been charged off,
submitted for collection, or that have resulted in a judgment being entered against him.
Those debts have been delinquent since July 2005 and earlier. Additionally, Applicant had
a timeshare he owned foreclosed on in November 2004. He has made no payments on
any of the debts and has no plan to resolved them other than to wait until his father-in-law
dies with the expectation that he will inherit sufficient funds from the man to pay his
delinquent creditors. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply. I have
considered all potential mitigating conditions under Guideline F and find none apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Applicant’s explanation for not listing the delinquent indebtedness is not credible.
It is unbelievable he could be so ignorant of what is and has been occurring within his
household that he would be unaware of a judgment being entered against him, a time
share being foreclosed, or creditors undoubtedly making efforts to collect on long-standing
delinquent accounts. Further, his knowledge of what has in fact been occurring with his
finances is clearly demonstrated by his acknowledgment in his answer to the SOR that he
has failed to live with his means. DC 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personal security questionnaire, personal history
statement, of similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
5
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies. I have considered all mitigating
conditions under Guideline E and find none apply.  
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept based upon what little is known about Applicant, the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying conditions,
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concern caused by the financial considerations
present in this case and his personal conduct. He has failed to overcome the case against
him or satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guidelines F and E are decided against
Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
HENRY LAZZARO
Administrative Judge
