 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07081 
 SSN: ------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 20, 
2006. On September 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 25, 2007. He 
answered the SOR in an undated document and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on October 22, 2007. Department 
Counsel filed notice he was ready to proceed on October 31, 2007, and I received the 
case assignment on November 5, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
8, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 7, 2007.  Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, and 
they were admitted without objection.  
 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional 
matters.  On December 13, 2007, he submitted AX E through H, and they were 
admitted without objection.  His facsimile cover sheet and index of additional exhibits is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I.  Department Counsel’s response to AX E 
through H is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit II. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on December 14, 2007. The record closed on December 21, 2007. 
Based on the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.m.  He denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c through 1.l.  His 
admissions in the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I 
make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old electronics technician employed by a defense 
contractor.  He previously served in the U.S. Marine Corps from July 2000 to July 2005 
(GX 2).  He held a security clearance in the Marine Corps (Tr. 48), and he currently 
holds an interim clearance (Tr. 14).   
 
 In 2002, Applicant’s mother became seriously ill, and he cosigned several 
accounts for her, including the delinquent charge accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.j, 
and 1.k (Tr. 72).  When his mother passed away in August 2002 with virtually no money, 
Applicant became responsible for her debts (Tr. 37, 52). 
 
 Applicant was married in April 2002, the same year his mother became ill.  He 
was a private first class (pay grade E-3) at the time.  His wife worked at a job paying 
slightly more than the minimum wage (Tr. 53).   
 
In January 2003, Applicant’s son was born brain-damaged, and he died in 
August 2003.  The medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i was incurred for his son’s 
treatment, but it was not submitted to TRICARE.  Applicant was unaware the claim had 
not been submitted, and he is in the process of submitting it (Tr. 36).   
 
After the death of their son, Applicant’s wife became severely depressed and 
stopped working (Tr. 37-38, 53).  The combination of his mother’s debts and his wife’s 
loss of income caused him to fall behind on his own debt payments.  Applicant’s wife 
returned to work in early 2004 (Tr. 53). 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.a was incurred when Applicant allowed his stepfather to 
use his social security number to apply for a loan.  His stepfather moved to another 
 
3 
 
 
state and stopped making payments after Applicant’s mother died, leaving Applicant 
responsible for paying the debt. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is the same debt as 
alleged in ¶ 1.a (Tr. 59-61). 
 
 Applicant found a civilian job within a month after being discharged from the 
Marine Corps, earning about $35,000 per year (Tr. 47), more than he earned in the 
Marine Corps (Tr. 56).  He has worked for his current employer since January 2006 (Tr. 
40), and he currently earns about $55,000 per year (Tr. 48).  He is highly regarded by 
his current supervisor, who described him as “a consummate professional,” and 
commended him for his hard work and dedication (AX H).   
 
In August 2007, Applicant prepared a personal financial statement reflecting net 
monthly income of $2,712, expenses of $2,160, debt payments of $122, and a net 
remainder of $480 (GX 2 at 17).  He did not include his wife’s net monthly income about 
$1,000 per month or her car payment of $150, because at the time he was living with a 
roommate to save money, she was staying with her mother, and they decided to keep 
their income and expenses separate (Tr. 67). 
 
 In October 2007, the month following his receipt of the SOR, Applicant began 
working with a credit counseling service to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
1.h, and 1.j.  As of the date of the hearing, he had made two monthly payments of $199 
to the service (Tr. 40).  His payment plan provides for paying off the debts included in 
the plan in three years (Tr. 64).   
 
 Applicant has submitted the necessary paperwork to withdraw funds from his 
401k retirement account to pay the delinquent rent alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b (Tr. 34).  He 
has more than $5,000 in his retirement account (AX B). 
 
 Applicant attempted to contact the collection attorney alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m but 
could not locate him, after extensive on-line searches.  He located the original creditor, 
who would not accept payment because the account had been sold (Tr. 72).  He has 
never been contacted by the attorney (Tr. 73). 
 
 When Applicant began falling behind on some of his debt payments, he reduced 
expenses by disposing of an additional car, attempting to negotiate partial payments to 
his creditors, and working off duty at part-time jobs (Tr. 55-56).  He paid off several 
debts that no longer appear on his credit report and are not alleged in the SOR (Tr. 45, 
49). 
 
 The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized in the 
table below. 
 
4 
 
 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Stepfather’s loan $2,883 Credit counseling plan Tr. 34, 42; AX C 
1.b Rent $1,235 To be paid with 40lk loan Tr. 34, 61, AX B 
1.c Cable equipment $522 Debt resolved Tr. 57-58 
1.d Stepfather’s loan $2,555 Same as 1.a AX C 
1.e Car loan $156 Payments are current Tr. 35; AX F at 10 
1.f Cable service $55 Paid Tr. 44; GX 3 at 3 
1.g Mother’s credit card $100 Paid Tr. 35, AX G 
1.h Jewelry $380 Credit counseling plan Tr. 43; AX C 
1.i Medical $465 Submitted to TRICARE Tr. 36 
1.j Mother’s credit card $3,782 Credit counseling plan Tr. 36, 43; AX C 
1.k Mother’s credit card $281 Same as 1.g Tr. 36, 71 
1.l Credit card $132 Paid Tr. 50; AX E at 2 
1.m Collection attorney $584 Cannot find attorney; 
original creditor will not 
accept payment 
Tr. 36-37, 73 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . 
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person 
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information.  This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which disqualify, or may disqualify, the 
applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has 
the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in 
AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline sets out several conditions that could raise security concerns. 
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Finally, under AG ¶ 19(e), a security concern can be 
raised by “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ration, 
and/or other financial analysis.”  Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is sufficient to 
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@  AG ¶ 20(a).  This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@  If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.@ 
 
 Applicant incurred numerous debts, some of which were resolved only recently 
and are not fully paid.  Thus, I conclude the first prong (“so long ago”) and second prong 
(“so infrequent”) are not established.  However, Applicant’s financial problems occurred 
when he cosigned several obligations for his mother, and foolishly allowed his 
stepfather to use his (Applicant’s) identity to obtain a loan.  The medical debt occurred 
because of the birth and subsequent death of his son.  Because these events are not 
likely to recur, I conclude the third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is established.   
 
 Applicant’s conduct facilitating his stepfather’s fraudulent loan application 
demonstrated bad judgment at the time, raising the question whether the final element 
of AG ¶ 20(a) (“conduct does not cast doubt . . . .”) is established.  However, it occurred 
more than five years ago, during a period when Applicant was dealing with multiple 
tragic events.  Since that incident, Applicant has matured, acted responsibly, and has 
earned a ringing endorsement from his current employer.  Thus, I am satisfied that his 
foolish transaction with his stepfather does not cast doubt on his current good judgment, 
and I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
person’s=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
Applicant encountered several events beyond his control: his mother’s illness 
and death, his stepfather’s failure to keep his agreement to make loan payments, his 
son’s death, and his wife’s bouts of depression after their son’s death.  His largest 
debts, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.k, were attributable to his mother and 
 
7 
 
 
stepfather.  He reacted to these events responsibly, paying what he could, negotiating 
with creditors, disposing of a car, working a second job, and living apart from his wife 
with a roommate to save money.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c).  Applicant 
sought help from a credit counseling agency and now has a negotiated payment plan 
that includes his largest debts.  He is about three years away from completing his plan, 
but the situation appears to be under control.  He is earning much more money than he 
did in the Marine Corps, and he is living frugally.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant began resolving his financial situation before the SOR was issued.  He 
has resolved his smaller debts and folded his large debts into a negotiated payment 
plan.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of these factors were addressed 
above under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the Marine Corps for five years, and he held a 
security clearance during his military service, apparently without incident.  His financial 
difficulties arose from a series of family tragedies and a fraudulent loan application by 
his stepfather.  He is now gainfully employed, financially stable, and highly regarded by 
his supervisor.  He was sincere and candid at the hearing, and I found his testimony 
credible. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the concerns based on financial considerations.  Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 My formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
