                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-02480
SSN:----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On August 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 10, 2007, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on October 10, 2007, and was scheduled for
hearing on November 8, 2007.  A hearing was held on November 8, 2007, for the
purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the
2
Government's case consisted of eight exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
and one exhibit.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 4, 2007.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Prior to the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to (1) delete
the words “alcohol dependence” from subparagraph 1.b and replace with “alcohol
abuse” and (2) add Guideline E allegations to allege falsification of (a) signed, sworn
statements in August and September 1990 and again in April 1997 by concealing his
continued use of marijuana after his stated July 1986 cut-off and (b) a signed, sworn
statement of April 1997 by denying he drank any alcoholic beverages prior to his being
arrested for driving under the influence (DuI) in January 1997.  There being no objection
from Applicant, and good cause being demonstrated, Department Counsel’s motion was
granted.  Applicant denied the amended allegations of the SOR. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to have (a) consumed alcohol to excess
and to intoxication from 1969 to 1972 and until at least 2006, (b) received inpatient
treatment from June 1986 until August 1986 for diagnosed alcohol dependence, and ©)
been arrested in January 2007 for aggravated DuI (dismissed). 
Under Guideline H, Applicant is alleged to have (I) used marijuana daily from
1977 to at least 1985, (ii) used cocaine monthly from 1977 to August 2004, (iii) received
outpatient treatment for alcohol abuse and poly-pharmacy abuse, and (d) tested positive
for cocaine in a random drug test in August 2004.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations covering
his involvement with alcohol and illegal drugs.  Applicant provided explanations to his
covered use of alcohol and illegal drugs, acknowledging his use of alcohol and drugs as
stated. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old facilities technician for a defense contractor who seeks
to retain his security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant was introduced to alcohol in high school.  Between 1977 and 1980
(while in the military), he  consumed approximately a six-pack of beer a day. During this
same period, he also used marijuana on a daily basis, and cocaine monthly (R.T., at 42-
43).  Contemporaneously, he tried other drugs as well.  Once discharged from the
military, he went to work for his father’s construction company and tried tech school.  He
was forced to withdraw from his school studies, however, when his wife became
pregnant (R.T., at 44).  Over the course of the ensuing six years (between 1980 and
3
1986), he did not drink every day, but when he did drink, he usually drank to intoxication
(R.T., at 44-45).  When he felt additional pressures from his marriage, he would some
times drink before going to work (R.T., at 45).  Applicant admits to using marijuana daily
during this six-year period, as well as cocaine (although not as much).  
In June 1986, Applicant voluntarily admitted himself to an inpatient treatment
facility (CU Hospital).  Upon admission, he was diagnosed by a certified physician with
alcohol and poly pharmacy abuse and admitted for detoxification (see ex. 8).  After
successful detoxification, he was transferred to adult rehabilitation, where he was
treated for family dysfunction, chemical dependency, and a lack of a recovery program.
While in treatment, Applicant attended all required individual and group sessions and
was credited with interacting well and making considerable progress (see ex. 8; R.T., at
46).  He was discharged in August 1986 with a favorable prognosis and a
recommended post-discharge regimen of 90 AA/NA meetings in 90 days, sustained
avoidance of alcohol and all mood altering substances, continued work on family
relationships, and advised outside therapy as necessary (ex. 8; R.T., at 47).
Following his 1986 hospital discharge, Applicant utilized outpatient treatment for
a brief time and maintained sobriety for 4 to 6 months before relapsing into both alcohol
consumption and marijuana/cocaine use, some times binging on cocaine (R.T., at 47-
48, 63).  Around 1989, he was ticketed for having an open container in his vehicle and
paid a fine (R.T., at 48-49). While he continued to consume alcohol on a regular basis
after his discharge, he stopped using marijuana altogether around 1988 (see ex. 6).
In January 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with aggravated DuI after
he failed to provide police with a sufficient breath sample.  He had consumed a number
of drinks at a local bar and was driving home when he was stopped by police (R.T., at
53-54).  When he failed an administered sobriety test at the scene, he was escorted to
the local police station for further testing.  Once in court, the DuI charges were
dismissed due to the likely malfunctioning of the breathalyzer.  Based on his admitted
three beers before his arrest, though, the incident qualifies as an alcohol-related
incident, despite the dismissal of the charges.
For a number of years following his 1997 DuI arrest, Applicant continued to drink
on a regular basis, sometimes to intoxication (see ex. 3; R.T., at 56).  Tired of the
hangovers, which could sometimes last up to one week after a week of binge drinking
episodes, he began curtailing his drinking in the 2002 time period.  Between 2002 and
2004, he consumed a six-pack of beer a week on average, and rarely any mixed drinks
(ex. 3; R.T., at 64-65).  Since his 2004 positive drug test, he not only ceased using
illegal drugs, but he reduced his alcohol consumption even further: “maybe once every
two weeks” he estimates (R.T., at 66).
Despite his denials of returning to any kind of sustained use of illegal substances
(such as cocaine and marijuana) after giving up drugs in 1988, he is on record for
testing positive for cocaine in August 2004 (see ex. 6; R.T., at 59). In a September 2006
OPM interview, he admitted to using cocaine for about two weeks before his positive
4
drug test and  purchasing 4 to 5 lines of cocaine at a party and snorting the same a
couple days before the test (see ex. 3; R.T., at 60-62).  He assures that he has not used
any form of illegal drugs since his positive drug test (R.T., at 64). Applicant’s claims
raise credibility issues that require careful consideration.
In two signed sworn statements given to a DSS investigator in August and
September 1990, respectively (see exs. 4 and 5), Applicant stated that he had not used
or purchased marijuana since July 1986.  He admits to making these misstatements but
did not know why he made them (R.T., at 51).  He was just as uncertain about his
denied use of any alcohol preceding his January 1997 DuI arrest when he answered
questions from an OPM agent in April 1997 (see ex.6; R.T., at 56-57).  Only when
confronted about pre-arrest alcohol consumption by the same OPM agent in an ensuing
interview in June 1997 did he admit to having three beers before his DuI arrest and
attribute his omissions to concerns that his being honest about his alcohol use might
hurt his case (see ex. 7; R.T., at 58).  
In a more recent OPM interview in June 2006, Applicant provided a complete
history of his alcohol and drug use for the interviewing agent (see ex. 3).  He provided
no explanations for his previous misstatements and omissions about his use of alcohol
and illegal drugs.  I view the 2006 OPM interview as a more credible account of
Applicant’s alcohol and drug history than those previously provided the DSS investigator
and OPM agent who interviewed Applicant.
Applicant’s series of misstatements and omissions about his alcohol and drug
use in the signed, sworn statements he signed for DSS and OPM are admitted and
probative of determined withholding of adverse information about his alcohol and drug
use.  His omissions are neither isolated nor explained and mask far more serious
alcohol and drug use than he was willing to acknowledge in his earlier interviews.
Considering all of the circumstances of his noted misstatements, they cannot be
excused as inadvertent.  They reflect a pattern of misstatements and omissions of
material information about his recurrent alcohol and drug use that was material to an
investigation of security eligibility, and both knowing and wilful under all of the
circumstances considered.
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors.  He is described as a skilled
worker and a very reliable and dependable team member who is respected by his fellow
co-workers (see ex. A). 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the Mitigating Conditions, if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
5
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness (Adjudicative Guidelines, paragraph 21). 
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Improper or illegal involvement with drugs raises questions
regarding an individual’s willingness or ability to protect classified information.  Drug
abuse or dependence may impair social or occupational functioning, increasing the risk
of an unauthorized disclosure of classified information (Adjudicative Guidelines,
paragraph 24).
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process (Adjudicative Guidelines, paragraph 15). 
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
6
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant is a highly regarded electronics technician for a defense contractor with
a history of regular alcohol consumption and illegal drug use over a 30-year period.
Security concerns are raised, too, over Applicant’s misstatements and omissions
regarding the extent of his alcohol and drug use in a series of interviews with
Government investigators.
Alcohol issues
Over the course of 30-years, Applicant consumed alcohol abusively to the point
of intoxication.   After a brief respite from abusive drinking following his discharged from
inpatient treatment in 1986, Applicant returned to heavy drinking, that included binge
drinking with hangovers that sometimes lasted as long as a week.  His excessive
drinking contributed to a DuI arrest in January 1997. Although the charges were
subsequently dismissed, the incident qualifies as an alcohol-related incident.  True, he
has managed to curtail his drinking since about 2002.  However, he has not obtained
any kind of renewed diagnosis and prognosis to check his ability to limit his alcohol
intake in the future.  
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions (DC)
of the Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol consumption may be applied: 22(a) “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting,
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” and
22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent.” 
Because Applicant’s drinking has never received any revised diagnosis since
1986 and ensuing relapse, his previous diagnosis of alcohol abuse has some current
assessment value. Accordingly, both 22(d) “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical
7
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or
alcohol dependence” and 22(f) “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence
and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program” have some application to the facts
at hand. 
To his credit, Applicant has curtailed his drinking for the past several years and
has not been involved in any alcohol-related incident since 1997.  Because his most
serious periods of alcohol abuse (between 1977 and 2002) involved heavy binge
drinking at times and contemporaneous use of illegal substances (mostly marijuana and
cocaine), his continued drinking retains some cause for concern.  However, his failure to
seek a recent evaluation and enlist substance abuse counseling for any identified
alcohol problem to date, his acknowledged binge drinking in the past, his
understatements of his alcohol consumption, and his failure to furnish a more recent
favorable prognosis create a confluence of troubling concerns that preclude application
of  any of the mitigating conditions of the guidelines for alcohol. Applicant’s renewed
commitment to abstinence does reflect positive changes in behavior supportive of
sobriety, and for these efforts Applicant is to be commended.  Favorable views of his
progress from work colleagues who know him are also helpful in gauging the strength of
his commitment to sobriety. 
Taking into account both Appellant’s history of alcohol abuse and his strong work
record, his mitigation efforts to date, while encouraging, reflect insufficient evaluative
information and evidence of sustained commitment to AA and its tenets of sobriety to
conclude he is no longer at risk of recurrence.  Without a favorable prognosis, it would
be imprudent to relax the time mitigation requirements of any of the mitigating
conditions of the alcohol and criminal conduct guidelines.
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant fails to make a convincing showing
that he has both the maturity and resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent
problems with judgment lapses related to alcohol.  Safe predictions that he is no longer
at risk of judgment impairment associated with such conduct are not warranted in these
circumstances.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by the alcohol guidelines of the SOR
Drug issues
As he acknowledges, Applicant used illegal substances (marijuana and cocaine)
regularly for over 10 years between 1977 and 1988.  In 1986, he was diagnosed by a
certified physician with poly pharmacy abuse.  And with a positive random drug test for
cocaine still so recent (August 2004), it is difficult to credit Applicant with any sustained
period of abstinence.   
Applicant's recurrent use of cocaine (a drug he used quite regularly in the past) is
sufficient to invoke four of the disqualifying conditions of the Adjudicative Guidelines for
drugs, i.e., DC 25(a) “any drug abuse”), DC 25(b) (“testing positive for illegal drug use,”
DC 25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
8
purchase, sale or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and DC 25(d)
“diagnosis of a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist,
or psychiatrist.”  Although Applicant was credited with successfully completing his CU
inpatient program in 1986, he soon returned to illegal drugs (marijuana and cocaine).
As a result, DC 25(f) “failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program
prescribed by a duly qualified medical professional”) has some continuing applicability
as well, especially in light of his more recent positive drug test.. 
Applicant assures he has not used any illegal substances since his positive drug
test in August 2004.  To be sure, misconduct predictions (to include return to illegal drug
use), generally, may not be based on speculation or suspicion.  See ISCR Case No. 01-
26893 (Appeal Bd. October 2002); ISCR Case No. 97-0356 (App. Bd. April1998).  The
Appeal Board has consistently held that an unfavorable credibility determination
concerning an applicant is not a substitute for record evidence that the applicant used
illegal drugs since his last recorded use, or based on his past use he is likely to resume
drug usage in the future.  See ISCR Case No. 02-08032 (Appeal Bd. May 2004). 
Based on Applicant’s long history of sustained marijuana and cocaine use, his
poly-pharmacy abuse diagnosis, his recent positive drug test, his past minimizing of the
extent of his use in his statements to Government investigators, and his return to illegal
substances following his 1986 inpatient treatment discharge, it is simply too soon to
enable him to claim the benefits of any of the mitigating conditions of the guideline for
drug involvement. 
Applicant’s assurances that his drug use is a thing of the past must be balanced
against his considerable history of recurrent use (at times quite heavy), his positive drug
test with his current employer, his poly-pharmacy diagnosis, his understatements when
asked about his drug use, and the relatively short amount of time that has elapsed since
his failed drug test.  Considering all of the developed evidence of record, Applicant fails
to mitigate security concerns associated with his recurrent use and possession of illegal
substances.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to sub-paragraphs 2.a
through 2.d of Guideline H. 
Falsification concerns
Potentially serious and difficult  to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s misstatements and omissions he made in the series of interviews he
participated in with DSS and OPM agents between August 1990 and April 1997.  So
much trust is imposed on persons cleared to see classified information that deviation
tolerances for candor lapses are gauged very narrowly. 
Applicant’s misstatements and omissions about his alcohol and drug use in the
signed, sworn statements he signed for DSS and OPM are admitted and probative of
his withholding of adverse information about his alcohol and drug use.  His omissions
are neither isolated nor explained and mask far more serious alcohol and drug use than
9
he was willing to acknowledge in his earlier interviews. Considering all of the
circumstances of his noted misstatements, they cannot be excused as inadvertent.
They reflect a pattern of misstatements and omissions of material information about his
recurrent alcohol and drug use that was material to an investigation of security eligibility,
and both knowing and wilful under all of the circumstances considered.
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with, since he failed to accurately describe
the extent of his alcohol and illegal drug use following his 1986 discharge from inpatient
treatment.  In the past, the Appeal Board has denied applicants availability of the
predecessor mitigating condition of MC 17(a) (“the individual made prompt, good-faith
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with
the facts”) where the applicant has waited many months to timely correct a known
omission. Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (Appeal Bd. January 1998) with DISCR
Case No. 93-1390 (Appeal Bd. January 1995).  Not until interviewed by an OPM agent
in June 2006 (almost 10 years since his last DSS interview in April 1997) did Applicant
voluntarily come forward with a full and complete history of his illegal substance and
alcohol use.
By minimizing his past involvement with illegal substances in his SF-86, Applicant
concealed materially important background information needed for the government to
properly process and evaluate his security updates.  His lack of plausible reasons for
understating his drug and alcohol use are not sustainable grounds for averting
inferences of falsification.  Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his substance
understatements/omissions and lack of any prompt, good faith corrections, Applicant’s
claims lack the necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he
knowingly and deliberately withheld material background information about his prior use
of illegal substances and alcohol.
From a whole person standpoint, Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors
and co-workers as reliable and dependable.  His overall reputation for reliability and
dependability in the work place is not enough, however, to overcome repetitive
misstatements and omissions about his drug and alcohol use in his background
investigations.
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2.2 factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to added sub-paragraphs 3.a through 3.d  of Guideline E.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2 2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, and conditions and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
10
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.c AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE H (DRUGS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras 3.a through 3.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
 
