DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )                ISCR Case No. 07-04494
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Leslie J. McAdoo-Gordon, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 25 September 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines E and J.  Applicant answered the SOR 15 October 2007, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 16 November 2007, and I convened a hearing
11 December 2007. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 3 January 2008.
 
The extent of Applicant’s marijuana use is unimportant to this case, except that it was relevant and2
material to his clearance applications in December 2005 and May 2006 and was sufficiently significant that
it would likely have resulted in further investigation into his drug use.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Accordingly, I incorporate his
admissions as findings of fact. He is a 23-year-old mechanical engineer employed by a
defense contractor since March 2006. He had previously interned for this employer
during college breaks in summer 2004, summer 2005, and winter 2005-2006. He seeks
to retain the security clearance he obtained fraudulently in April 2006.
When Applicant first applied for an industrial clearance in December 2005 (G.E.
1),  he deliberately concealed his marijuana use during summer 2001 and fall 2004 by
answering “no” to question 24 (illegal drug use, last seven years). In fact, he had used
marijuana at least four times each during summer 2001 and fall 2004.  Based on his2
false answers, Applicant obtained his clearance in April 2006 (G.E. 3).
Before starting full-time employment, Applicant’s company nominated him for a
higher level of clearance, and he completed a second clearance application in May
2006 (G.E. 2). Again, he deliberately concealed his marijuana use by answering “no” to
question 24. Based on his false answers, Applicant obtained an interim upgraded
clearance in July 2006 (G.E. 3).
Applicant had been nominated for a higher level of clearance in expectation that
he would eventually be given access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). He
knew that his background investigation would include a personal interview with an
investigator, and eventually a polygraph examination. He realized that his drug use and
falsifications might be an issue in the clearance process. He disclosed this information
to his facility security officer (FSO), who advised him to prepare a written statement
about the drug use and falsification, either to be sent to the government or taken by
Applicant to his interview. On 26 September 2006, before he had been contacted by the
investigator, he prepared a detailed account of his drug use and falsifications (A.E. A).
In his letter, he acknowledged concealing his drug use because he was “very scared of
admitting it to an authority figure and my parents.” During his interview on 17 October
2006, Applicant disclosed essentially the same information to the investigator, who
noted Applicant’s stated fear of embarrassment and not getting his clearance as
reasons for concealing his drug use (G.E. 4).
Applicant stated that he falsified his December 2005 clearance application
because he was competing the application on-line, at home, with his mother looking
over his shoulder. She knew all the details of Applicant’s life required by the application,
and she had previously helped him with similar forms. When they came to the drug
question, she just assumed the answer was “no” and Applicant did not contradict her,
he just clicked “no.” Similarly, when he was completing his May 2006 clearance
application, he was on-line, in his college dormitory room, but was on the telephone with
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
3
his mother getting necessary updates for the required information. In this case, he
concealed his drug use because he knew he would be living at home after college and
did not want to risk having his parents discover the printed copy of the application that
he would have with him when he came home. However, he admits that having
submitted the false answers, he took no action to disclose them to his employer until
September 2006. And although there are no government records that would otherwise
have disclosed his drug use, Applicant acknowledged that he has told some of his close
friends about his drug use. He is remorseful for his falsifications.
Applicant’s work references, who include the FSO, his supervisor, and the
president of the company, consider Applicant an excellent employee and praise his
honesty and integrity. All are aware of the drug and falsification issues in this case. All
recommend Applicant for his clearance.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any4
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, . . . [or] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
¶31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,5
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E and J,
and Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. He deliberately concealed his
illegal drug use from the government.  He did so knowing that his illegal drug use was of4
major security concern to the government, and believing that his clearance were at risk
if he told the truth. Even crediting his claims that his principal reason for concealing his
drug use was fear of his parents’ reaction and he had no intention of misleading either
his company or the government, the fact remains that he did mislead both his employer
and the government, and collected benefits from his falsifications—obtaining first his
initial clearance, then an interim upgrade.
Further, none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed
information was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant’s falsifications prohibited the
government from evaluating his illegal drug use in a timely fashion, and at a time when
such recent drug use might have raised significant security concerns. In addition, the
government detrimentally relied on Applicant’s falsifications in granting his clearance.
Finally, while his disclosure of illegal drug use in October 2006 may have been
forthright, it cannot be considered prompt. While I give Applicant some credit for coming
forth on his own, that credit is diluted by several factors. It is irrelevant that no
government records would have otherwise disclosed his drug use. Applicant’s are
expected to tell the government the truth anyway. In addition, the right references or
developed references in his background investigation might have revealed his
Record evidence clearly establishes that Applicant intended to conceal his illegal
drug use from the government and effect the course of his background investigation.
This conduct violated 18 U.S.C. §1001,  whether or not he was successful in effecting5
the course of his investigation. However, in this case his falsifications did alter the
investigation, as he was granted his clearance.
Applicant’s failure to disclose his illegal drug use demonstrates a lack of candor
required of cleared personnel. The government has an interest in examining all relevant
and material adverse information about an Applicant before making a clearance
decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse
information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient.
Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides
some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other
security concerns in the future, something the government relies on to perform damage
assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s conduct
5
suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government
interests. I resolve Guideline E and J against Applicant.
Beyond the specific guidelines alleged by the government, the generally
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions lead to the same result. Falsifications
are a core security concern [RAG &2(a)(1)]. His behavior was deliberate and not due to
circumstances beyond his control [RAG &2(a)(2); RAG &2(a)(5)]. His misconduct was
both recent and frequent [RAG &2(a)(3)]. I have considered Applicant’s youth, but that
consideration provides does not overcome the adverse inferences of his misconduct,
honesty being a core requirement for access, and not a difficult concept to understand
or hold Applicant’s to [RAG &2(a)(4).)] Rehabilitation or behavioral changes are difficult
to measure under these circumstances, given the scrutiny Applicant has been under
since his drug use came to light [RAG & 2(a)(6)]. He clearly sought to mislead the
government about his drug record, or was at least willing to benefit from his misconduct
[RAG &2(a)(7)]. Applicant’s willingness to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
government interests increases his potential vulnerability and he has not demonstrated
that the misconduct is unlikely to recur [RAG & 2(a)(8); RAG & 2(a)(9)]. The concern is
whether Applicant would disclose situations or circumstances, whether deliberated or
inadvertent, that raise security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial
doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his
falsifications.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
