 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: — – ---- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02239
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Michael V. Davis, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
On January 30, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance needed to renew a
security clearance he held since about 1996 as part of his employment with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to
make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national1
interest to give Applicant a security clearance. On August 17, 2007, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
2
addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline J (criminal2
conduct).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on October 2, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be held on November
5, 2007. However, on October 18, 2007, Applicant’s attorney requested a continuance
due to a schedule conflict. I subsequently rescheduled the hearing for November 19,
2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. Without objection, I admitted five exhibits
offered by the government (Gx. 1 - 5). Applicant testified in his own behalf, and offered
four exhibits, which were admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D.
He also presented two witnesses. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 28,
2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
Applicant’s request to renew his security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant was arrested on August 29,
2002; that he had a blood alcohol content of .12% and was charged with driving or
attempting to drive a vehicle while under the influence (DUI); and that he was found
guilty,  fined and placed on probation for one year. In SOR ¶ 1.b, the government
alleged Applicant was arrested on March 18, 2005, and charged with the same offense
as specified in SOR ¶ 1.a; and that he was found guilty and placed on probation for two
years effective in December 2005. In SOR ¶ 1.c, the government alleged Applicant was
arrested on July 15, 2006, was charged with second degree assault, and that the
charge was nolle prosequi in October 2006.
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted without explanation all of the
allegations therein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 51 years old and has worked for the same defense contractor since
1996 as a facilities technician. He has held a security clearance throughout his tenure at
the company. Before 1996, Applicant was self-employed in the trucking business and
other occupations for about 15 years. By all accounts, he has been an exemplary
employee. People who know him in the workplace and in the community speak highly of
his reliability, honesty, integrity, and professionalism. According to an associate and a
supervisor at work, there have been no incidents or problems with Applicant’s handling
of classified information or with his access to classified facilities. (Ax. A)
Applicant’s arrest in 2002 occurred after he and friend had been drinking at a
local establishment. Part of his sentence included mandatory alcohol counselling at a
3
local treatment center. Applicant attended 12 sessions of outpatient counselling over 12
weeks.
Applicant has three brothers. His parents are both deceased, with his father
having passed away in October 2005 after a long battle with heart disease. Applicant
lives in a house on a five-acre tact of land where his father’s house also sits. It was not
unusual for Applicant to drive rather than walk to his father’s house. In doing so, he did
not drive on any public roads.
Applicant was his father’s primary caregiver in the last year of life, and was often
stressed and upset over his father’s condition. When Applicant was arrested in March
2005, he had been drinking at his father’s house after taking his father to the doctor. His
father was being tested and treated for a serious heart condition that would prove fatal
later that year, and they had received a poor prognosis that day. Applicant had at least
two or three mixed drinks before leaving his father’s house in the evening. He got into
his car and sat there for a few minutes with the lights on. As Applicant started to drive
away from his father’s house, two police officers who had observed him the state road
along which his property sits, drove onto the property and stopped him. They
determined he had been drinking and arrested him. Applicant insisted he had not
broken any laws because he was driving on private property, so he refused a
breathalyser test. 
After several continuances, Applicant was convicted at a bench trial and
sentenced as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Gx. 5) He served seven days of a ten-day jail
sentence. Beginning in December 2005, Applicant was placed on two years of
supervised probation. He was ordered to attend 26 weeks of outpatient counselling,
which he completed at the same center he attended in 2002. Applicant attended nearly
90 Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. A device was placed on his car until September
2006 that would prevent him from starting the car if there were alcohol in his system.
As part of his supervised probation, Applicant was ordered to report to a
probation officer once a month, and to submit to random urinalysis testing. He was also
ordered to abstain completely from alcohol. As of October 2007, his probation officer
expected Applicant would be released from his probation on time as he had complied
with all of the terms of his probation. (Ax. D)
All of the urinalysis tests administered to Applicant during his probation were
negative for alcohol or drugs. However, Applicant has acknowledged drinking alcohol in
moderation on occasion during his probation. (Tr., 52 - 53, 68)
Applicant has been legally separated from his wife since 1995. They were first
married in November 1977. In 2006, Applicant had a girlfriend who was prone to erratic
behavior. After they got into an argument one day in July 2006, she tried to take his car
after she had been drinking. Applicant tried to physically restrain her, but she managed
to drive away. Applicant reported the incident to the police. When they found his
girlfriend, she reported she had been assaulted. Applicant was then arrested and
charged with assault. The charge was never prosecuted, and the incident did not violate
his probation.
 Directive. 6.3.3
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and4
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or4
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties at hearing require consideration of the security concerns and
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline J (criminal conduct) at AG ¶ 30.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.7
  See, Rettig v. State, 34 __ 419; 639 A. 2d 670 (1994). Applicant’s attorney argued that if he had represented8
Applicant in the 2005 case, he surely would have appealed the verdict. However, such an appeal more
probably would have focused on whether the police had probable cause to enter Applicant’s property and
detain him in the first place.
5
Analysis
Criminal Conduct.
Under Guideline J, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30) The government
presented sufficient information to support the allegations of criminal conduct in SOR ¶¶
1.a and 1.b. There is not sufficient information to show that Applicant engaged in
criminal conduct when he was arrested in July 2006, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.
Applicant’s arrests in 2002 and 2005, and his probationary status as of the hearing
require consideration of the disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 31(a) (a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(d) (individual is currently on
parole or probation). 
In response to the government’s information, Applicant’s position is that, because
he was not on a public road when he was charged with DUI in 2005, he was not
engaged in criminal conduct. However, the courts in his state have ruled on such
arguments and have held the laws against driving under the influence do not limit such
conduct to public roads.  Thus, the issue is whether (a) enough time has passed since8
Applicant’s last instance of criminal conduct, (b) circumstances have changed such that
it is unlikely he will again engage in such conduct, and (c) Applicant is sufficiently
rehabilitated from his earlier conduct. If answered in the affirmative, the mitigating
conditions listed in AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;)
and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement) should be considered.
Applicant was on probation at the time of his hearing on November 19, 2007. He
was due to be released from that status on December 16, 2007, because, as his
probation officer wrote, “[Applicant] has followed his order of probation with no
violations.” (Ax. D) However, because Applicant did not “[t]otally abstain from alcohol”
(Ax D.) as required by the terms of his probation, it appears his probation officer was
misinformed. The Directive’s adjudicative guidelines, such as AG 31 (d), are not to be
applied in an inflexible or unreasonable manner. Without more, the fact Applicant was
on probation for another three weeks after the hearing may not have been disqualifying.
However, Applicant’s willing disobedience of a court order that addressed the underlying
source of the charges of which he was convicted. Based on the foregoing, Applicant has
failed to present information sufficient to mitigate the government’s concerns about his
criminal conduct.
 See footnote 4, supra.9
 See footnote 7, supra. 10
6
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guideline J. I have also reviewed
the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG 2(a).9
Applicant is a mature adult who is well-respected in his community and at work. He has
been a responsible and reliable employee since 1996, and there is no indication he has
ever mishandled classified information or access to classified facilities. However, the
positive information about his job performance and personal life is insufficient to mitigate
the ongoing doubts about his suitability for continued access raised by his criminal
conduct and failure to abide by the terms of his probation. Because protection of the
national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in
favor of the national interest.  10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
