  
  
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05311 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: B. Daniel Lynch, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 5, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on November 1, 2007, and reassigned to me on November 28, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 28, 2007, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on December 19, 2007, at Woodland Hills, California. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 8, 2008. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
  
  
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant’s counsel did not object. The request 
and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I through XI. Applicant’s counsel submitted a formal 
request that I take administrative notice of certain facts, as contained in HE XII and 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. AE A is a newspaper article about Iraq and Iran. I did 
not take administrative notice of the facts in AE A, but admitted the document into 
evidence as an Applicant Exhibit. I took administrative notice of the facts in AE B. The 
facts administratively noticed for the government and Applicant are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below. AE C was admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her 
own behalf and called four witnesses. Applicant’s counsel submitted a Hearing 
Memorandum which was marked HE XIII. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. She was born in 
Iran. Applicant started to visit relatives in the U.S. when she was seven years old. She 
immigrated to the United States in 1985, when she was about 15 years old. She 
attended college and graduate school in the United States, and has a Bachelor of 
Science degree and a Master of Science degree from an American university. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 1993. She has held a security clearance for about 12 years. 
She is single with no children.1 
 
 Applicant’s father passed away in 1979. Her mother is 78 or 79 years old. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2002. Applicant did not admit that her mother was a dual 
citizen of Iran. However, her mother splits her time between the U.S. and Iran. As 
discussed below, U.S. citizens who were born in Iran are considered Iranian citizens by 
Iranian authorities. Applicant did not testify that her mother has formally renounced her 
Iranian citizenship, and did not specify which country’s passport her mother uses to 
enter Iran. There is strong circumstantial evidence that she uses an Iranian passport. I 
find Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran. Her most recent 
stay in the United States was from November 2006 to July 2007. She has lived in Iran 
since she left the U.S. in July 2007. Prior to her last trip to the U.S., when she was in the 
United States, she would stay with one of her five children. Before her last trip, 
Applicant’s brothers rented their mother an apartment. She felt isolated in her U.S. 
apartment, and the children would have to drive her when she needed to go 
somewhere. She is more comfortable in Iran. When in Iran, she lives in a condominium 
that she owns in a big complex and has ready access to public transportation. She 
receives a pension in Iran based on her husband’s retirement.2  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 69-73, 98; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 80-84, 88-97; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
  
  
3
 Applicant has two brothers and two sisters. All her siblings are U.S. citizens 
residing in the U.S. One sister has not returned to Iran, but the other three siblings have 
visited Iran, using Iranian passports.3  
 
 Applicant did not consider herself a dual citizen after she was naturalized as a 
U.S. citizen. However, Iran continued to consider her an Iranian citizen. She became 
aware of some of the problems Iranian-Americans had attempting to travel to Iran with a 
U.S. passport. She felt that traveling to Iran with a U.S. passport would unduly draw 
attention to her, and she could be harassed. This is consistent with the advice in the 
State Department’s Consular Information Sheet, as discussed below. She obtained an 
Iranian passport in 1997. The passport expired in 2002. She renewed it in 2003. She 
visited her mother in Iran on four occasions, in 2003, again in December 2003 through 
January 2004, in 2005, and in 2006. Her passport expired in 2007. Applicant still 
possesses the expired passport. She has no immediate plans on returning to Iran, but 
may renew the passport or obtain another Iranian passport if she has to travel to Iran 
again to visit her mother. She does not feel comfortable attempting to enter Iran on a 
U.S. passport.4  
 
 Applicant feels no loyalty to the government of Iran, and has strong feelings 
against their current government.5 Applicant’s counsel called four witnesses and 
submitted three character letters on her behalf. She is described as a loyal, patriotic 
American with integrity, who is trustworthy, reliable, honest, dedicated, hard-working, 
and professional. They all recommended Applicant for a security clearance.6 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.” The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq is also a concern. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 79; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 77-80, 84-88, 97; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; HE II. 
 
5 Tr. at 96. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-67; AE C. 
  
  
4
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian- 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personnel possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
The National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage – 2000, lists the seven countries that 
most actively engage in economic collection and industrial espionage. Iran is not among 
the seven countries and is not named in the report. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 7(a), Acontact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
 
6 
 
 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. Applicant’s mother is currently living in Iran, a 
country that is clearly hostile to the United States.7 It is considered the most active state 
sponsor of terrorism, and the government of Iran has committed numerous, serious 
human rights abuses against its people. Her mother’s presence in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG && 7(a) and (b) have been raised by 
the evidence. 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); HE I-XI. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is clearly close to her mother. She and her siblings would like their 
mother to move permanently to the U.S. However, her mother is more comfortable in 
Iran. She is elderly with no connection to the Iranian government. Applicant is a well 
educated, highly regarded engineer, and a patriotic U.S. citizen. She has deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. Applicant is also a citizen 
of Iran, a country that is hostile to the United States, sponsors terrorism, and commits 
human rights abuses against its people. AG & 8(b) is partially applicable. No other 
mitigating condition is applicable. 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen. The 
passport was current until it expired before the hearing. This raises a security concern 
under AG ¶ 10(a). The renewal of her Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen constituted 
an action to obtain recognition of her Iranian citizenship. AG ¶ 10(b) is also applicable. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Applicant did not consider herself a dual citizen after she was naturalized. Iran, 
however, continued to consider her an Iranian citizen. She exercised her Iranian 
citizenship by obtaining and using an Iranian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
Because of her active exercise of dual citizenship, it was not based solely on her 
parents’ citizenship or birth in Iran. AG ¶ 11(a) is not applicable. While Applicant has 
voiced a willingness to renounce her dual citizenship, it was with a condition. Applicant 
honestly admitted that she may need to renew or obtain another Iranian passport to 
travel to Iran if her mother needs her. She is not truly willing to renounce her Iranian 
citizenship as long as her mother lives in Iran. Applicant’s conditional willingness to 
renounce her Iranian citizenship is not sufficient to fully invoke AG ¶ 11(b). Applicant’s 
passport has not been destroyed or surrendered, but it has expired. I find that it is   
“otherwise invalidated,” and AG ¶ 11(e) is applicable. No other mitigating condition is 
raised by the evidence. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Iran. She 
came to the U.S. when she was 15 years old. She became a U.S. citizen, as did her 
 
9 
 
 
mother and her four brothers and sisters. She was educated here and became a highly 
regarded engineer. Applicant did not consider herself a dual citizen after becoming a 
U.S. citizen. Iran felt otherwise and continued to consider Applicant one of its citizens. 
She felt that she could be harassed if she traveled to Iran with a U.S. passport. She 
used an Iranian passport on her four trips to Iran between 2003 and 2006. The passport 
is now expired. Applicant was open, candid, and honest at the hearing. She admitted 
that she may renew the passport or obtain another Iranian passport if she has to travel 
to Iran again to visit her mother.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. Iran is the most active state sponsor of 
terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. Most of Applicant’s family is in the 
United States, and her mother is a U.S. citizen. However, her mother is also an Iranian 
citizen and is presently living in Iran. That raises considerable security concerns that 
Applicant was unable to mitigate. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her Foreign 
Influence and Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
