1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02262
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 31, 2008
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September14,
2005 (Government Exhibit 1).  On June 8, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F concerning the Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on July 2, 2007, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on August 6, 2007.  The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on August
22, 2007.  I received the case assignment on August 27, 2007.  DOHA issued a notice
of hearing on September 10, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
2
September 26, 2007. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits A through D, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing on October 5, 2007. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
October 10, 2007, to submit additional matters.  On October 10, 2007, he submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits E through J, without objection. The record closed on October 10,
2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 61, married and has a Bachelor of Science degree.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Deputy Manager and seeks to obtain a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Applicant submits that the majority of his financial problems began when he
was laid off by his employer in 2001.  As a result of this layoff, the Applicant decided to
invest in a business franchise in November 2001.  The business never took off and, in
December 2004, the business was closed down.  The Applicant invested his life savings
in this franchise, and his total loss was between $500,000 and $800,000.  (Transcript at
39-42.)  In March 2005 the Applicant was re-employed by current employer and has
been employed with them since that time.
As will be discussed in more detail below, the Applicant is attempting to pay off
his delinquent debts one by one as he can.  His intention is to pay all of his past due
indebtedness while staying current with his other debts.  (Transcript at 26-27.)
1.a. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to Citi in the amount of at least
$15,357.00 as of the date of the hearing.  This was a personal credit card that was used
for the business.  The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current
intention to make payments on this debt.  (Government Exhibit 2 at 2; Transcript at 23-
28.)
1.b. The Applicant admits, and the available evidence indicates, that he has
three different credit card accounts with Bank of America.  (Government Exhibit 2 at 3.)
All have been sold to different collection agencies.  Two are discussed under
subparagraphs 1.e. and 1.f., below.  The Applicant negotiated a settlement on the third
account.  He has been making payments of $305.00 a month since December 2006.
As of September 2007 the balance had been reduced from $9,685.03 to $8,186.30.  At
the current rate of payment, it will take approximately two years for the Applicant to pay
this debt off.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and F; Transcript at 28-32.)
1.c. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to Palisades / Bank One Chase
in an original amount of $11,886.64.  He made a payment arrangement in November
3
2006 with the law firm handling the case for the creditor.  After an initial payment of
$966.66, he has been paying $535.96 every month for this debt.  As of August 2007 the
balance has been reduced to $9,889.55.  At the current rate of payment, it will take
approximately two years for the Applicant to pay this debt off.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B
and E; Transcript at 32-36.)
1.d. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to Citi in the amount of at least
$13,812.00 as of the date of the hearing.  This was a personal credit card that was used
for the business.  The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current
intention to make payments on this debt.  (Government Exhibit 2 at 1; Transcript at 36-
37.)
1.e. This is one of the three Bank of America debts incurred by the Applicant.
This debt was paid by settlement by the Applicant in April 2007.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C;
Transcript at 37-38.)  This subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
1.f. This is one of the three Bank of America debts incurred by the Applicant.
He has made arrangements with a successor bank in interest.  The debt has been
reduced from $9,750.65 to $5,000.00.  As of September 2007, the Applicant was
current on this account and reduced the debt to $4,355.48.  He hopes to pay $150.00 a
month towards this account.  At the current rate of payment, it will take over two years
for the Applicant to pay this debt off.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H; Transcript at 43-46.)
1.g. The Applicant made a payment arrangement with this creditor, who was a
successor in interest to Sears.  He began making payments in September 2006 and
completed making payments in April 2007.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G; Transcript at 46-47.)
This subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
1.h. The Applicant’s stepson made a $20,000.00 gift to his father to enable the
Applicant to pay off the franchise fees on his business and close it down.  The stepson
provided a statement saying that he gave this money to his father as a gift, though the
Applicant views it as a loan.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I; Transcript at 42-43.)  This
subparagraph is found for the Applicant as the understanding of the alleged creditor is
that the money is a gift and not a loan.
The records indicate that, in addition to the past due debts discussed above,
which total $51,600.33, the Applicant has 14 other credit cards or debts that were in a
current status as of April 2007.  He usually pays the minimum amount due on these
debts.  These debts totaled $38,508.00 as of April 2007.  His total indebtedness is
approximately $90,108.33.  (Government Exhibit 6 at 15-16; Transcript at 57-62.)
Mitigation
The Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he is a highly
respected person and employee.  He is described as a person who always displays “a
high degree of integrity, responsibility, and dedication to duty.”  Several of the
4
correspondents state that the Applicant is a person of high ethical standards.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
5
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. The Applicant has over $50,000.00 in past due debts, which have
been due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties arose primarily between about 2001 and 2004.  However, it took him
until 2006 to begin to pay off any of the past due indebtedness.  This mitigating
condition is not applicable to this case.  
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn . . .), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.”  The Applicant was laid off from his job.  As a
result, he attempted a new career and invested in a franchise operation.  The business
failed.  The Applicant, in addition to losing his investment, used credit cards to make
business purchases.  Three years after the business has closed, there are two creditors
who the Applicant has made no payments to at all.  The other creditors are being paid
very slowly.  I cannot find, under these particular circumstances, that the Applicant has
acted responsibly under the circumstances.
6
The Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to pay off some of his creditors.
Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(d) is arguably applicable.  However, given the fact that he is
$90,000 in debt, I cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The Applicant is a hard-working,
highly respected, professional person who has had some tough times.  However, by his
own admission, the Applicant made some poor business decisions during the time he
was laid off.  He has begun to make payments on some of his past due debts, but he is
at least two years away from being current on all of his debts. 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all the Applicant’s debts are paid - it is
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security
clearance.  Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), this conduct is recent.  Given the Applicant’s overall
debt load, I am not convinced that he has a proper understanding of how he got in these
circumstances.  Accordingly, I cannot find that there have been permanent behavioral
changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  Accordingly, at the present time, I cannot find that there is
little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶2(a)8)), or that
the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (AG ¶2(a)9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and/or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
