KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge challenged findings are supported by substantial record evidence and are
sustainable.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence in mitigation was insufficient to
overcome the government’s security concerns.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-13306
DATE: 00/19/2008
DATE: September 19, 2008
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13306
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Decision at 2.  (“Applicant’s financial difficulties began occurring seven to eight years ago.  He attributed them1
to personal problems, medical bills for his daughter’s various surgeries, a lack of sufficient income, and a previous
drinking problem.”)
Applicant’s Brief at 1-2.2
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 25, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 19, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge’s findings are based on
substantial evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision under Guideline
F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
 
(1) Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that Applicant’s financial difficulties
were due in part to “a previous drinking problem.”   In support of that contention, he argues that he1
does not have “a drinking problem,” but instead has “. . . a problem with drinking beer.  The problem
was, and is, medical.  I have peripheral neuropathy in both feet and beer exacerbates the problem.”2
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1. “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding
from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607,
620 (1966).
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings are based on
substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn
from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the
case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern
are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21025 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2007).  
(2) Applicant also contends that the favorable evidence in the record was sufficient, as a
matter of law, to overcome any security concerns presented by his financial difficulties.  Specifically,
he argues that his failure to pay off his outstanding debts was not due to “procrastination,” because
he “. . . has only reached the level where payment of outstanding debts was possible in the last five
Applicant’s Brief at 1.3
The Judge also found that several of the debts listed in SOR were duplicates.  The debts in paragraphs 1(a) and4
1(b) were the same debts, as were the debts listed in paragraphs 1(f) and 1(m).
3
or six years,” and during that time period he did pay off a substantial student loan.   He notes that3
he has had excellent job performance and that he has held a security clearance without incident for
15 years.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious
or contrary to law.
The Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under
any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-22325 at
3-4 (App. Bd. July 30, 2004).  Security clearance determinations are not limited to consideration of
work performance or conduct during duty hours.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08623 at 5 (App. Bd.
July 29, 2005).  The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails
to properly handle or safeguard classified information before it can deny or revoke access to such
information.  See Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969).  The absence of security
violations does not bar or preclude an adverse security clearance decision.  See ISCR Case No. 01-
03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005).
 
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 13, 2008).
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible
application of relevant conditions and factors.  She gave Applicant credit for debts that he had paid
and found in his favor with respect to several of the factual allegations.   However, she reasonably4
explained why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to
overcome the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep.
4, 2007).  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her
decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962). “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple     
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
