                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-11179 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
On January 8, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On August 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 31, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of 
 
2 
 
 
a hearing. On October 22, 2007, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), containing seven Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on 
October 26, 2007. Applicant received the FORM on November 1, 2007, and had 30 
days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional information. On December 
14, 2007, Applicant submitted a letter that I marked Applicant Exhibit (AE 1) and 
admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel.  On December 21, 
2007, I received the case assignment.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.k of the SOR. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and divorced. Since November 1977, he has worked for 
a federal contractor. He is a logistics research and requirements analyst. He received a 
secret security clearance in February 1997. (Item 4). 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based on financial considerations. In his 
letter, dated December 14, 2007, Applicant indicated that he did not want to file a 
December 2003 bankruptcy, but did on his lawyer’s advice. (SOR ¶ 1.a). The 
bankruptcy was later dismissed in January 2004. (Item 6). He attributed his financial 
difficulties at the time of the bankruptcy to his father’s death and related expenses. He 
anticipated resolving his outstanding debts by March 2007. (AE 1).  
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed five delinquent debts listed in the SOR, totaling 
$21,569. He denied the debts listed in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.h, 1.i, and 1, j, totaling $21,133. He 
disputes the $870 debt noted in ¶ 1.f, and asserted he paid the $6,906 mortgage debt 
listed in ¶ 1.l. He did not submit any evidence documenting that he paid any debts, that 
he has a repayment plan for them, or that he formally disputed or investigated them. 
The amount alleged in the SOR is approximately $52,479. According to the January 
2007 and August 2007 credit bureau reports (CBR), the delinquent debts date back to 
2001. (Items 5 & 6). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
4 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt that 
he has been unable to pay for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s 
financial worries arose around 2001 and continue into 2007. Hence, they are ongoing 
and this condition cannot apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant noted that 
some of his debts arose as a result of his father’s death. However, he did not present 
evidence indicating what he took steps to manage them during that time frame. I find 
this potentially mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant did not present any evidence of credit counseling or 
documentation of efforts to resolve the delinquent debts, either by payment or 
settlement. He did not submit any evidence that he is financially sound and able to 
manage his debt. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
 
5 
 
 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 56 year old man, 
sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for managing his finances and incurring debt. 
He has a long work history with his current employer and has held a security clearance 
for a number of years. While he is not required to be debt free, he is expected to 
manage his finances in such a way as to meet his obligations. In this case, Applicant did 
not present any evidence that he has taken steps to resolve and responsibly manage 
his finances and debts, despite being on notice of the problem for some time. Without 
an established budget and a track record of consistent financial management 
demonstrating reliability and good judgment, I am concerned that his financial problems 
will recontinue.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
