KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s credibility determination is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04226.a1
DATE: 08/18/2015
DATE: August 18, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04226
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 5, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 5, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in finding that he
had deliberately omitted information from his security clearance application (SCA) and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military for five years, receiving an honorable discharge.  He
has worked for Government contractors since 2002.  Married a second time, he has one minor child.
Applicant’s SOR lists delinquent debts totaling nearly $107,000.  These debts include a large
one for a second mortgage on a home.  He contends that he was lied to about balloon payments that
doubled his monthly payments.  The home was eventually the subject of a foreclosure action. 
Applicant provided no corroboration for his contention that the second mortgage was cancelled.
Applicant has a delinquent debt for a vehicle loan.  The vehicle was repossessed after his ex-
wife failed to make payments on it as required by the divorce settlement.  Applicant did not provide
a court document showing a disposition of the marital property.  He also owes a medical debt that
he believes should have been paid by his health insurance.  He claims that the creditor is no longer
willing to accept payment on a charged-off debt.  He failed to provide any documentation from the
creditor.  Applicant’s SOR lists three other debts that the Judge found had been resolved.  
When he completed his SCA, Applicant answered “no” to questions about the following:
whether he had had debts turned over to collection agencies within the previous seven years; whether
he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debt in the previous seven years; and whether he was
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt.  He testified that he thought his debts were older than
seven years, so he thought he did not have to disclose them.  The Judge found that Applicant’s
explanation was not credible.
Applicant testified that he pays his debts, although he did not present a budget, account
statements, or asset statements to demonstrate his financial status.  He enjoys a good reputation for
the quality of his work performance.  In addition, he also received some awards while in the military. 
The Judges’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant had failed to act in a responsible manner regarding his three
largest debts.  She noted that reliance upon the charged-off status of a debt does not equate to
responsible action.  She stated that Applicant’s debts are ongoing and there is no evidence of changed
2
circumstances.  Regarding Guideline E, the Judge stated that Applicant had done nothing to correct
his omissions and provided no reason to believe that he was acting upon improper advice.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s military service and that he had
held a clearance for many years without incident or concern.  However, she reiterated her conclusion
that he had not shown responsible behavior in regard to his debts.  She also stated that Applicant’s
veracity remained a concern.
Discussion
Applicant denies that he intentionally omitted the information from his SCA and challenges
the Judge’s finding to the contrary.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In evaluating an
applicant’s mens rea, a Judge must consider the applicant’s answers in light of the totality of the
record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01607 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015).  
We note the Judge’s finding, contained in the Analysis section of the Decision, that Applicant
“clearly knew he had mortgage debts that were delinquent within the seven-year time frame.” 
Decision at 7.  This finding is consistent with the record that was before her.  We also note her
negative credibility determination, to which we are required to give deference.  Directive ¶ E.1.32.1. 
The Judge made a finding to the effect that Applicant attributed the omission to his belief that his
debts were too old to require disclosing them.  At the hearing, however, he appeared to contend that
he had made a simple mistake in arithmetic.1  These explanations are not totally consistent.  In any
event, even if there were no inconsistencies, a reasonable person in the Judge’s position could find
that Applicant’s claim to have believed that none of his SOR debts needed to be reported lacked
credibility.  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility determination.  We conclude that the
Judge’s finding is supported by substantial record evidence.
Applicant has cited to some Hearing Office cases that, he believes, support his effort to
demonstrate mitigation.  We have given these cases due consideration as persuasive authority. 
However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03223 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2015).  The cases Applicant has
cited contain certain mitigating circumstances that are not present in his own.  For example, in one
of them, the applicant had disclosed a willful omission from his SCA before having been confronted
with it.  The cases that Applicant has cited are not sufficient to undermine the Judge’s overall
decision.     
1Applicant completed his SCA in 2012.  He testified, “If it was 2012, I should have gone back to 2005.  That
is a true statement.  I thought I did.”  Tr. at 55-56 (emphasis added).  “I’m not exactly sure how my math worked out
at that time.  I just didn’t list it.”  Tr. at 62.  
3
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence.  This argument
is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  Neither is it
sufficient to show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01578 at
4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2014).
  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “Failure or inability to . . . satisfy debts . . . may
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations[.]” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  Under Guideline E, “any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process . . . will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action[.]”
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.   “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
