 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00201 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 21, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 5, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
 
June 28, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which she did. AE G was offered and 
Department Counsel indicated she did not object. Department Counsel’s memorandum 
is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.1 The exhibit was admitted into evidence and the 
record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 10, 2012.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, 1.s, 1.t and 1.w. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. She has worked for the same company since 2007. 
She is a logistics supervisor. She is a high school graduate and has earned some 
college credits. She served in the Air Force from 1991 to 1995 and was honorably 
discharged in the pay grade of E-3. Applicant is divorced and has two children, ages 16 
and 18 years old. Her eldest child is in college and is working.2  
 
 In 2000, Applicant and her husband divorced. She received $600 in child support 
from 2000 to 2005. Sometime between 2005 and 2006 the child custody arrangements 
were modified and the parents shared custody so neither parent received child support. 
Each parent was responsible for supporting the children when they were in their 
custody. Applicant stated that the loss of child support payments impacted her 
finances.3 
 
 Applicant worked in retail from 1995 to 2006. She had periods of unemployment 
in 2003 and 2004; one period was for four months. Before working for her present 
employer, Applicant was employed by an insurance company for part of 2006 to part of 
2007.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that she has struggled financially due to underemployment. 
She stated that she contacted credit counseling agencies, but most of her debt was 
already in collection and they would not help her consolidate the delinquent debt. She 
had four surgeries from September 2010 to October 2011. She was on short-term 
disability from July 2011 to October 2011. For the first four weeks of her short-term 
                                                          
1
 AE G consists of 4 pages. HE I consists of one page.  
 
2
Tr. 18-20. 
 
3
 Tr. 21-22. 
 
4
 Tr. 20-21. 
 
 
3 
 
 
disability she received her full income; the next four weeks she received 60% of her 
normal income, and the remaining time she received 40% of her normal income.5  
 
 Applicant stated that in 2009 she began paying two delinquent student loans and 
completed the payments in July 2010. Her loans were incurred when she attended 
school in 2003 and 2004. She made a couple payments on them when they were due, 
but they became delinquent in 2006. She is disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i because she 
did not attend school during the semester she is being charged. She did not provide 
documents to support her dispute. She stated she began voluntarily repaying her 
student loans in July 2009. She indicated in December 2009, her wages were then 
garnished for $500 a month to repay her student loans and for two years her income tax 
refunds were automatically applied to the debts.6  
 
 In 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance. The Government requested 
she complete financial interrogatories. Due to a pending move within her company, she 
missed the deadline and her clearance was denied. She admitted she was aware in 
2008 that her finances were a security concern.7  
 
 In March 2010, in response to Government interrogatories, Applicant indicated 
she had begun a self-guided debt management program to repay her creditors. She 
stated that she had contacted all of her creditors via phone and letter. Her intention was 
to start paying the debts with smaller balances until her debts were paid off. She 
analyzed her household budget and looked for ways to reduce her expenses. In 
response to the interrogatories she provided unsigned copies of letters to her creditors 
stating she would send each $10 every month and would continually increase the 
amount as her total overall debt decreased, until the debt was paid.8 When questioned 
at her hearing if she actually sent the letters and the $10 payment, she indicated she did 
not. She stated she contacted the creditors via telephone and was told the payments 
would be insufficient. She never sent any payments to the creditors.9  
 
 Applicant stated she again attempted to resolve her delinquent debts on her own 
from October 2011 to February 2012. She stated she paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f 
($30), 1.h ($160) and a debt that is not alleged in the SOR.10 Applicant stated the debt 
                                                          
5
 Tr. 22-24, 28-30. 
 
6
 Tr. 31, 33-38, 56.  
 
7
 Tr. 32-33. 
 
8
 GE 3. 
 
9
 Tr. 24-27, 38-45. 
 
10
 AE A, B, C. 
 
 
4 
 
 
in SOR ¶ 1.f is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.t. Applicant settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s 
($78) for $39, on November 11, 2011, but did not have a receipt.11  
 
 In February 2012, Applicant was feeling stressed and frustrated. She met with 
credit counselors and a lawyer. They recommended that she file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
She heeded the advice and filed in March 2012. She has attended the requisite financial 
counseling course. All of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are included in the 
bankruptcy except SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.m, 1.s and 1.t. Two additional debts not alleged are 
also included in the bankruptcy (balances of $230 and $361). Applicant’s Schedule F-
Creditors holding unsecured nonpriority claims totals $35,629.12 Applicant believes by 
filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy she will get a fresh start and reduce her stress. She plans 
on attending some financial savings programs offered in the community.13  
 
 Applicant has approximately $60 remaining each month after she pays her 
expenses. She does not have any open credit cards. She admitted her car payment has 
been late once in the past six months. She has about $10,000 to $12,000 in a 401k 
retirement account. She has no other savings. She stated she has been following a 
budget for the past three to four months. The budget she provided lacks details. She 
believes in the past four months she has changed her ways and is proactive regarding 
her budget and ability to save. She believes she has a game plan set for her future. She 
stated she is going to budgeting class twice a month. Applicant’s bankruptcy is still 
pending and her debts have not yet been discharged.14  
 
 Applicant provided character letters that reflect she is a strong performer at work. 
She has three subordinates under her direct supervision and provides training and 
leadership to over 50 subordinates at four locations. Applicant’s supervisor describes 
her as sharp, innovative and a quick learner with proven abilities to adapt quickly to new 
challenges. She is competent, motivated, dedicated, dependable, reliable, and well-
disciplined in her work habits. Others commented on her professionalism, intelligence, 
and ability to manage her time. She is considered an invaluable asset. She is organized 
and leads by example. She is meticulous and focused on the details of her work.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
11
 Tr. 24-27, 41-45. 
 
12
 Tr. 25-27; AE G. 
 
13
 Tr. 25-27, 46-74. 
 
14
 Tr. 67-72, 75. 
 
15
 AE F. 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay 
or resolve. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because her delinquent debts have not been paid, 
resolved, or discharged in bankruptcy at this time. Based on Applicant’s current financial 
status, I am unable to conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur in the 
future. I cannot apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant had periods of underemployment and unemployment. She had some 
medical issues and her income was reduced when she received short-term disability 
benefits. These conditions were beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has 
been steadily employed with the same employer since 2007. She applied for a security 
clearance in 2008 and became aware at that time that her finances were a security 
concern. Applicant has not been proactive in attempting to resolve her delinquent debts. 
She paid a couple small debts, but did not create a realistic budget until a few months 
ago. She did not file Chapter 7 bankruptcy until after she received the SOR. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies because some of the conditions that resulted in her financial 
problems were beyond her control. However, there is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant completed the required financial counseling when filing for bankruptcy. 
She stated she is taking a budget class and has been following a budget for three to 
four months. She stated she has reduced her spending. She stated that after she pays 
her monthly expenses she has $60 remaining. At the time of her hearing, her debts had 
not been discharged in bankruptcy. At this juncture, it is too early to conclude that there 
are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control even if her 
debts are eventually discharged. There is insufficient evidence to conclude she made 
good-faith efforts to repay her overdue creditors. I find AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies 
because she received financial counseling and is attending a budget class. I find AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i but did not provide documented proof to 
show the actions she has taken to dispute or resolve the debt. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
39-year-old single mother. She served in the Air Force and was honorably discharged. 
She has been employed by her present employer since 2007 and is considered a 
valued employee. Applicant has had financial problems since 2000. She has been 
accumulating delinquent debt for many years. She had periods of underemployment 
and periods of unemployment. She has been aware since 2008 that her finances were a 
security concern. She did not take a proactive approach to resolve her delinquent debt 
and managing her finances when she initially became aware they were a security 
concern. She stated she has had limited resources in the past to resolve her delinquent 
debts. She recently filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy after receiving the SOR. Her debts are 
not yet discharged. She indicated in the past three to four months she has been 
following a budget. She has $60 remaining at the end of each month after paying her 
expenses. It is too soon to conclude that Applicant’s finances are no longer a security 
concern. She does not have a stable track record of managing her finances. Applicant 
has not met her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the Financial Considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s-1.t:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u-1.v:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.w:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
