 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-00805 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations and personal conduct (falsification). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 26, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct).  The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant answered the SOR on November 11, 2011. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on January 3, 2012. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge on January 10, 2012, and was reassigned to me on March 28, 
2012. Delay in scheduling the case was caused by Applicant serving in an overseas 
location. (See Tr. 9-12 and GE 1-5 for further details.) DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on May 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2012. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into evidence without objection, and he 
testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 30, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations under 
Guidelines F and E “with extenuating circumstances.” His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old security specialist, who has been employed by a 
Government contractor since October 2008. As a security specialist, he has served 
primarily overseas. He is also an “on and off” part-time minister/traveling evangelist for 
which he receives offerings. (GE 1, Tr. 20, 32-34.) He seeks a security clearance, which 
is a requirement of his continued employment. Applicant successfully held a security 
clearance while serving in the U.S. Marine Corps, discussed further below. (Tr. 20-21.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1973, and enlisted in the Marine 
Corps in November 1973. He served 22 years of active service and retired as a gunnery 
sergeant (pay grade E-7) in November 1995. Applicant’s primary military occupational 
specialty was 6026 – aircraft power plants mechanic T-56.  He held a secret clearance 
from 1986 to 1988 while in the Marine Corps. Applicant is “a couple of credits” short of 
earning a bachelor of science degree in aviation management. (AE A, Tr. 21-25.) 
 
Applicant has been married two times. He was married to his first wife from 
January 1981 to December 2004. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant married 
his second wife in December 2004, separated in August 2008, and divorced in October 
2011. Applicant has three children, a 32-year-old son, and two twin sons, ages 28. He 
stated that all three sons are “pretty much” dependent on him for support. (GE 1, Tr. 26-
32.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR listed 27 debts totaling $170,199.  These debts are ongoing and were 
accumulated during Applicant’s second marriage. The vast majority of the debts alleged 
are consumer-related and have been in a delinquent status beginning in 2007. Their 
validity has been established by Applicant’s admissions and evidence produced by the 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Government. All 27 debts remain unpaid or unresolved. No attempt has been made to 
pay these debts. (GE 8 – 11, Tr. 66-67.) 
 
Applicant offered evidence that his second wife was largely responsible for 
incurring these debts through deceptive practices or unauthorized use of credit cards 
during their marriage. However, he acknowledged during his October 2009 Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interview and also during cross-examination that 
several of the debts were generated by him or for his benefit. He further acknowledged 
that his home went through foreclosure in “approximately, 2006, 2007,” a foreclosure 
listed on his SOR. (SOR ¶ 1.o., GE 7, AE A, AE C - AE E, Tr. 36-41, 47, 57-66.) 
Applicant sought financial counseling in October 2011 and was advised by his financial 
counselor, “[i]n the next three years, these debts will no longer appear on (his) credit 
report. These debts are time-barred!” His financial counselor further advised him to stop 
paying his debts as they will drop off his credit report, and to open savings accounts at 
several banks and then borrowing from those accounts using the savings as collateral 
to regain a credit worthy status. Applicant ultimately acknowledged that he was legally 
responsible for the debts. (AE A, AE D, Tr. 41-43, 48.) 
 
Applicant estimated that his 2011 annual income apart from his military 
retirement was in the range of $50,000. His military retirement covers his home 
mortgage and utilities, a home that is in his son’s name. Applicant is current on his day-
to-day expenses. He earns about $4,000 a month. Applicant stated most of his money 
goes towards helping his family. (Tr. 50-57.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his July 2009 e-QIP, he was asked under Section 26: 
Financial Record, whether he had ever defaulted on any type of loan; whether he ever 
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; whether he had ever had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; 
whether he had ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debts; and whether he was 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts. He answered “no,” which was clearly 
not accurate given his extensive debt going back to 2007. 
 
 Applicant stated during his October 2009 OPM interview that he did not list the 
accounts because he had no idea of his financial issues because he had not pulled his 
credit report. (GE 7.) At his hearing, he testified that “I admitted to them (falsifications), 
but with extenuating circumstances,” adding “I don’t recall, and I wouldn’t have falsified, 
if I knew exactly what was asked of me, that I didn’t have any debt.” Applicant had 
previous experience completing security clearance applications when he was in the 
Marine Corps, but held firm to his explanation that he misunderstood the question. (Tr. 
44-47, 67-71.)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted a reference letter from his senior pastor, who provided 
favorable comments about his good character. (AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his OPM personal interview, and his statement at his hearing. Applicant’s 
SOR lists 27 delinquent debts totaling $170,199. Applicant’s delinquent debt began in 
2007 and has been ongoing. The Government established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 
   
   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants partial application of AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(c).1 Applicant sought the professional services of a financial counselor, 
who advised him, in part, to let the statute of limitations run on all of his debts. The 
DOHA Appeal Board has long held that this method is not an acceptable means to 
resolve one’s debts. 
 
Applicant emphasized that his former wife was largely responsible for his debts, 
but acknowledged that he bore some responsibility for several of the debts and was 
legally responsible for all of the debts. Applicant’s financial situation was no doubt 
                                            
1
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
damaged as a result of his divorce and his former spouse’s financial irresponsibility. 
Apart from his SOR debts, Applicant appears to be living within his means. 
  
Applicant did not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
He has received a salary and a portion of his military retirement since the inception of 
these debts. He did not maintain contact with his creditors.2 Prior to his hearing, 
Applicant did not make any payments to his SOR creditors. He has not regained 
financial responsibility. In sum, Applicant’s efforts are insufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsification of his SF 86 on April 27, 2009, in 
this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.3  
                                            
 
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
3
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant admitted “with extenuating circumstances” in his SOR response that he 
failed to disclose his debts as alleged on his July 2009 e-QIP. At his hearing he further 
explained that his failure to list his debts was a misunderstanding as a result of his 
former wife accumulating all of the debts without his knowledge. On cross-examination 
it became clear that several of the debts were his, which at a minimum, should have 
heightened his awareness that his financial situation was problematic. Applicant did 
acknowledge that he was legally responsible for the debts. He contended that his 
inaccurate answers were not deliberate and intentional attempts to deceive the 
Government.  
 
I do not find Applicant’s explanation persuasive given his age, level of 
intelligence, experience of having held a security clearance as a career Marine, and the 
number of debts involved, several of which he acknowledged. I find Applicant 
intentionally falsified his e-QIP in responding to the alleged questions. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
                                                                                                                                            
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose past-due debts on a security clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
approval of his access to classified information. Applicant honorably served 22 years as 
a career Marine retiring as a senior non-commissioned officer. He is dedicated father to 
his three children and has served overseas for a defense contractor. 
 
There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. 
There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. His second divorce 
and problems with his spouse’s handling of their finances contributed to his financial 
woes. One character witness lauds his diligence, professionalism, and responsibility. I 
give Applicant substantial credit for acknowledging his shortcomings. These factors 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant’s SOR lists 27 delinquent debts totaling 
$170,199. His strategy of dealing with his debts is to wait until they are time barred and 
let them fall off his credit report. Applicant’s failure to be completely forthright when 
completing his July 2009 e-QIP is equally troubling. I recognize the difficulties Applicant 
encountered with his wife during his second marriage, however, those difficulties do not 
justify his failure to pay just debts nor do they justify his failure to be truthful when 
completing his e-QIP. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person. I conclude financial considerations 
and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.aa:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
