 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 10-07514                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph R. Price, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 27, 2010. On June 19, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 28, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 
 
2 
 
 
2012. I convened a hearing on August 15, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 4 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified, 
called no witnesses, and introduced nine exhibits, which were identified and marked as 
Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. I and entered in the record without objection. At the 
conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until August 22, 2012, so that Applicant 
could, if he wished, provide additional information on the payment of his delinquent 
debts. Applicant timely filed a seven-page exhibit. Department Counsel did not object to 
its admission. Department Counsel’s comments are identified as Hearing Exhibit (H.E.) 
1. I marked Applicant’s post-hearing submission as Ex. J and entered it in the record. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2012. 
 
                                      Procedural Matters 
 
Applicant requested that his hearing be expedited. At his hearing he affirmatively 
waived ¶ E3.1.8.of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, which provides that an applicant shall 
be notified at least 15 days in advance of the time and place of his or her hearing. (Tr. 
19-22.) 
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 18, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 
and 1.g.). He denied the two allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.). Applicant’s 
admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 48 years old, married, and the father of an adult son. In 1983, he 
enlisted in the U.S. military; he completed his service in 1987 and received an 
honorable discharge. He received a bachelor’s degree from a four-year institution of 
higher education in 1992. He then took a series of private-sector contract positions and 
was awarded a security clearance as a government contractor in 2000. (Ex.1; Tr. 45-
48.) 
  
 In 2005, while still employed as a government contractor, Applicant established a 
small business in a rented store front; the business specialized in internet technology 
services. In 2005 and 2006, the business flourished. When his government contract 
ended in 2006, Applicant devoted himself full time to his business, which continued to 
do well. However, at the end of 2007, Applicant’s business diminished during a financial 
downturn. In May 2008, Applicant’s wife lost her position when the non-profit 
organization she worked for experienced financial difficulties. Applicant found it difficult 
to meet his business expenses, including rent on the store, and he informed the owner 
of the property that he was in financial difficulty because of the decline in business. The 
 
3 
 
 
property owner agreed to forebear in demanding rent on the store property for six 
months in the hope that the business climate for Applicant would improve. Applicant 
continued to keep the property owner apprised of the status of his business. (Tr. 56-64.)  
 
 The business climate did not improve. Applicant met with the building owner and 
worked out a plan to remove his inventory, settle debts with vendors, vacate the 
property, and pay his delinquent rent. Applicant then took a position with a government 
contractor and used a portion of his earnings to pay off the debts arising from his failed 
small business. After a time, Applicant’s employer advised him that he should apply for 
a security clearance. (Tr. 60-64.)  
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant was responsible for a $6,134 account, 
in collection status, which has not been satisfied. At his hearing Applicant testified that 
the debt arose from a personal loan he took out to finance his business in 2007. He 
stated that he had paid approximately $1,000 on the balance, and because of his 
previous payments, the creditor agreed to settle the debt for $4,330. He provided 
documentation establishing that he had settled the debt in June 2012. (Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. 
G; Ex. I; Tr. 68-70.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant was responsible for a $1,103 delinquent 
account, in charged-off status, to a credit card company. Applicant stated that the debt 
arose when the manager of his business, in Applicant’s absence, used a credit card to 
purchase inventory. He provided documentation showing that the debt had been 
satisfied in full. (Ex. H; Tr. 70-72.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant owed a $1,650 delinquent debt, in 
collection status, to a credit card company. Applicant stated at his hearing that he paid 
the debt in full, and he provided documentation corroborating full payment of the debt. 
(Ex. F; Tr. 72-74.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant owed a creditor $1,489 on an account in 
collection status. He provided documentation showing that the debt has been satisfied 
in full in April 2012. (Ex. A; Ex. I; Tr. 74-75.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant owed a $4,531 judgment that was filed 
against him in 2008. The SOR also alleged at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owed a $1,304 
judgment filed against him in 2007. Applicant denied responsibility for both judgments. 
He stated that he had disputed the two judgments with one of the credit reporting 
agencies because the debts were listed on his credit report as belonging to another 
individual.1 He provided a recent credit report which showed the judgment debts were 
no longer on his credit report. In a post-hearing submission, he also provided 
information from the credit reporting company explaining its policy for removing disputed 
debts from credit reports. In part, the policy stated that if disputed information was 
                                            
1
 Applicant reported that the credit reporting agency called debts that did not belong to Applicant 
“hitchhikers” on his credit report. (Tr. 76.) 
 
4 
 
 
found, upon investigation by the creditor, to be accurate, it would remain on the 
disputant’s credit report. Additionally, Applicant provided a printed notice from the 
creditor reporting agency showing that there were no active disputes on his current 
credit report. (Ex. I; Ex. J; Tr. 75-76.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.g. that Applicant owed a creditor $552 on an account in 
collection status. Applicant provided documentation showing that the debt was paid and 
the account satisfied in full in May 2010. (Ex. C; Tr. 76-78.) 
 
 Applicant was released by his employer because he lacked a security clearance, 
and a clearance was a requirement for working on all of the employer’s existing 
contracts. He received his last paycheck on July 13, 2012. His annual salary when he 
was employed was approximately $110,000. (Tr. 79-83.) 
 
 Applicant stated that his wife would be laid off from her job on August 31, 2012. 
When he was employed, Applicant paid down his delinquent debts and saved any 
money that was left over each month. He explained that he and his wife were using 
savings for living expenses, and he had sufficient savings remaining to pay his living 
expenses for one month. He also reported he had about $30,000 in his 401(k) plan. (Tr. 
80-83.) 
 
 In a post-hearing submission, Applicant reported the following monthly  
expenses: rent, $1,200; electricity, $104; cell phones, $116; internet and land-line 
telephone, $77; cable, $67; credit monitoring service, $17; storage, $160; Applicant’s 
student loans, $800; Applicant’s wife’s student loans, $300; food, gasoline, and  
entertainment, $400. Applicant’s monthly expenses total approximately $3,241. He has 
not had financial counseling. (Ex. J; Tr. 92-93.)   
 
 Applicant provided a letter from his former employer stating that if he were to be 
granted a security clearance, he would be eligible and “welcome to reapply for 
employment with [government contractor].” The employer stated that it currently had 
openings fitting Applicant’s qualifications. (Ex. J.)     
 
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
5 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt associated with 
his failed business, and he was unable to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that arose when his small 
business experienced a financial downturn and then failed in 2007 and 2008. When he 
realized the business was in trouble, Applicant consulted with his landlord and told him 
of his financial hardship. Soon after acquiring his job as a government contractor, 
Applicant began to save his money to pay the delinquent debts remaining from the 
 
7 
 
 
failed business. Applicant provided documentation establishing that five of the seven 
debts alleged on the SOR were paid or settled in full. He also provided credible 
information to support his assertions that the two remaining debts alleged on the SOR 
were not his. While Applicant has not had financial counseling, he has acted responsibly 
and in good faith to resolve delinquent debts that arose when his business failed during 
a financial downturn in 2007 and 2008.  
 
 Applicant has consistently acted in a responsible manner to address his financial 
delinquencies. By his actions, he has demonstrated that he is serious about satisfying 
his creditors and avoiding future debt. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d) 
and 20(e) all apply in mitigation to the facts of this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 48 
years. In 2005, he established a small business that initially thrived and grew. Then, in 
2007 and 2008, a financial downturn occurred that caused his business to fail. Applicant 
acted responsibly when his financial problems arose. He kept his landlord creditor 
informed, and when he acquired employment as a government contractor, he set aside 
money to pay the debts that remained from the failed business. He then resolved the 
financial delinquencies alleged and identified in the SOR as his. Applicant provided 
documentation showing that he systematically and responsibly paid or settled his 
delinquent debts.   
  
Overall, the record evidence persuades me that Applicant is mature, trustworthy, 
and capable of being entrusted with access to classified information. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                       Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR  APPLICANT 
 
              Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.g.: For Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
