 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03617 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 8, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record. Department Counsel, however, later requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
May 24, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 6, 2012. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through L that were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was initially left open until June 20, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional 
matters and, based on his subsequent request, the deadline was extended until July 6, 
2012. Applicant timely submitted additional documents that were marked as AE M 
through U and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 21, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old systems engineer who works for a defense contractor. 
He had worked for another defense contractor from December 2009 to April 2012 and 
then began working for his current employer. He graduated from high school in 1989. 
He is four credits short of earning an associate’s degree in computer technology 
engineering. He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) from 1995 to 
2003, attained the grade of staff sergeant (E-6), and received an honorable discharge. 
He has been married since 1996 and has four children, ages 16, 14, 10, and 4. He has 
held a security clearance for approximately the past 16 years without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent debts totaling about 
$30,300. These debts were listed on credit reports obtained on December 23, 2009; 
September 26, 2011; and January 4, 2012. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted six of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h), and denied the 
remaining two (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g). His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2 
 
 Following his discharge from the USMC, Applicant both worked and attended 
school on a full-time basis. During this time period, he generally took three or four 
courses per semester. As a full-time student, he received about $1,000 per month from 
the GI Bill, which he used for his family’s monthly living expenses. In November 2005, 
he purchased a sport utility vehicle (SUV) for about $42,000. The monthly payments on 
that vehicle were $842. In May 2008, he changed jobs and his work hours also 
changed. Because he could no longer attend school full-time, he was no longer eligible 
for monthly GI Bill benefits. The loss of that money created a financial hardship that 
caused him to become delinquent on certain accounts. At the hearing, he admitted that 
he exercised poor judgment in purchasing the SUV and in relying on the GI Bill benefits 
for paying everyday expenses. He also mentioned that he has a disabled child who 
requires a wheelchair to be mobile. His wife does not work so that she can care for the 
children. The alleged debts are addressed separately below.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 4-5; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. 23-36, 47-48; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $1,007. This was a credit card account that 
Applicant opened in 2007 and became delinquent in 2008. He did not pay this 
delinquency, but submitted a letter from the collection agency that indicated, based on 
information provided, it was instructing the three major credit reporting agencies to 
delete this account from his credit file.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $1,668. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
indicated that he received a settlement offer from the creditor, but had not yet accepted 
the offer. At the hearing, he testified that he paid $1,200 or $1,300 to settle this debt in 
May 2012. His most recent credit report indicates that this debt was “paid in full.”5  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – charged-off account for $17,300. This account was a vehicle loan for 
the SUV that Applicant purchased in 2005. He made payments on this loan for about 
three years before the SUV was repossessed in November 2008. It was sold at an 
auction for $19,000. Before the hearing, he contacted the original creditor and was told 
this debt had been transferred to another agency. In his post-hearing submission, he 
indicated that he established a repayment plan with the collection agency. Under this 
plan, he will pay $200 per month until the debt is repaid. He authorized the collection 
agency to withdraw $100 on the 1st and 15th of each month. He provided proof that he 
made those payments on June 15, 2012, and July 1, 2012.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $999. Applicant entered into a settlement 
agreement for this debt. In May 2012, he satisfied this debt by making a payment of 
about $400. His most recent credit report indicates this debt is “paid in full.”7  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $454. This debt was for an alarm system that 
Applicant had on his house. He testified that he was charged for services after this 
account was cancelled. He disputed this debt, and it no longer appears on his credit 
report.8  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $8,508. This debt was an unsecured personal 
loan for $5,000 that Applicant obtained while serving in the Marine Corps. He believes 
that he may have used this money to travel back home while he was on leave. He 
provided no proof of payments on this loan. This account has been deleted from his 
credit report, presumably because its age exceeded the seven-year reporting limitation 
of the Fair Credit Reporting Act.9  
                                                          
4 Tr. 24, 28-32; GE 2; AE I. 
 
5 Tr. 24-25, 32-33; GE 2; AE H, J.  
 
6 Tr. 27-28, 33-36, 46-48; GE 2; AE M, O-Q, .  
 
7 Tr. 25-26 36-37; GE 2; AE K.  
 
8 Tr. 37-38 42; GE 2; AE H.  
 
9 Tr. 38-40; AE H. See also 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $217. This debt was a cell phone bill that 
reportedly became delinquent in 2009. Applicant disputed this debt. He provided 
documentation showing he has been a customer of another cell phone company since 
2006.10  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h – collection account for $157. This debt was a medical bill. He stated 
he paid this debt. It no longer appears on his credit report.11  
 
 Applicant testified openly and honestly at the hearing. He reported his delinquent 
debts in his security clearance application. He received financial counseling while 
serving in the Marine Corps. He has satisfactorily resolved other delinquent debts that 
were not listed in the SOR, including his mortgage. He is currently living within his 
means. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a Personal Financial Statement that 
indicated his net monthly income was $6,795, his total monthly expenses were $3,628, 
and his total monthly debt payments were $2,685, which left him a net monthly 
remainder of $482.12 
 
 In the USMC, Applicant received four Navy and Marine Corps Achievement 
Medals and two Good Conduct Medals. He served in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Letters 
of reference describe him as a dedicated professional. An Air Force officer said 
Applicant had unwavering ethics, professionalism, and sense of honor and indicated 
that he would trust him without question. In past two years, Applicant received high 
grades on his work performance appraisals.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
10 Tr. 26-27, 40-41; GE 2, 4; AE L, R, S.  
 
11 Tr. 41-42; GE 2; AE H.  
 
12 Tr. 43-49; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2, 3; AE H, T, U. 
 
13 Tr. 18-19; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE A-F, N. 
 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;   
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
As a general rule, an applicant is neither required to be debt-free nor required to 
pay all of his or her debts immediately or simultaneously. An applicant, however, must 
act responsibly. In many of these cases, an important consideration is whether the 
applicant developed a reasonable plan for repaying his or her delinquent debts and has 
taken sufficient action to show that he or she has a serious intent to effectuate the plan. 
Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be 
paid off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern.14  
 
 In this case, Applicant has been continuously employed throughout the span of 
time under review. He admits that he made mistakes that caused his financial 
difficulties. In particular, he overextended himself by purchasing an expensive SUV in 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 3 (App. Bd. May 31, 2011).(citing ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  
 
7 
 
2005, and acted imprudently by relying upon temporary GI Bill benefits for everyday 
living expenses. When his GI Bill benefits were terminated, he fell behind on certain 
bills. He has taken responsibility for those mistakes and has taken action to recover 
from them. He paid three of the delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.h), instituted a 
repayment plan for the largest debt (SOR ¶ 1.c), and disputed three of the other debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.g). AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply to SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h. 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.g. His financial problems are under control 
and are being resolved. It is unlikely that he will place himself and his family in a similar 
financial bind in the future. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant had one debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) that he has not paid. He apparently waited 
for this debt to be deleted from his credit report due to the passage of time. Because he 
has not attempted to resolve this debt in good-faith, it continues to weigh against him. 
Nevertheless, this delinquency occurred about ten years ago and does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find this debt has limited 
security significance. 
 
 At this point, Applicant has taken sufficient action to show that he is committed to 
resolving the remaining outstanding debt on his credit report (SOR ¶ 1.c). He has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his delinquent debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
Applicant is a talented, honorable, and mature individual. He honorably served in 
the USMC for four years and was awarded four Navy and Marine Corps Achievement 
Medals and two Good Conduct Medals. He served in a combat zone. He is well 
respected and highly regarded in his current job. He has held a security clearance for 
about 16 years without incident. By all accounts, he is a responsible, law-abiding citizen. 
He was candid and sincere at the hearing. He was respectful of the process and wants 
to correct his financial problems. He is current on his day-to-day living expenses and is 
working to resolve the remaining debt on his credit report. Both the applicable mitigating 
conditions and the whole-person concept analysis support a favorable clearance 
decision. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
