                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:  )
 )
                                                                       )                                                         
            ---------------------------------                    )     ISCR  Case No.  10-05104         
                                                                 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his security violations. He
mitigates security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 22, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Th is ac t ion  was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
2
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 2, 2011, and requested a decision on
the administrative record. (Tr. 14) At the request of Department Counsel, the case was
converted to a hearing. The case was assigned to another judge on April 16, 2012, and
reassigned to me on May 31, 2012. The case was scheduled for hearing on June 27,
2012, and was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of
four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits (AEs).
The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 5, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Following the hearing, I informed the parties of my intention to take administrative
notice of a State Department document covering the country of Vietnam.  There being
no objections, and for good cause shown, I have taken administrative notice of
Background Note: Vietnam, U.S. Department of State (January 2012).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or
government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with
respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in
Vietnam. Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent
with the provisions of Rule 201 of the Federal Rules of Evidence. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline K, Applicant allegedly (a) left a building unsecured and
unattended in March 2009 and received a verbal warning and briefing on proper
handling and storage of classified material; (b) had two combinations written on a piece
of paper in his wallet in March 2009 and received a written warning; and (c) improperly
transported classified hardware from a remote company building to a building on the
company’s campus, and given a courier briefing. 
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has family members who are citizens and
residents of Vietnam. Both his mother and brother are allegedly citizens and residents
of Vietnam. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
provided no explanations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
3
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Vietnam. (GE 2; Tr. 22)  While living in Vietnam,
he was placed in a concentration camp. (GE 2) He fled Vietnam in May 1981, first to
Thailand, and ultimately to the United States in 1982. (GE 2) His wife and son (just 18
months old when they fled Vietnam) are Vietnamese “boat people.” (GE 2; Tr. 23-24)
He has been married for 32 years. (GE 1; Tr. 25) His father-in-law was a high-ranking
officer in the Vietnamese government. 
In May 2009, Applicant and his son became naturalized U.S. citizens. (GE 1; Tr.
26) Applicant retains no loyalties to Vietnam and will always defend U.S. interests in
times of conflict. (Tr. 26) Applicant’s father passed away in 1996. (GE 2; Tr. 28)
Applicant attended a local community college in the United States between January
1984 and January 1987 and earned an associate’s of arts degree. (GE 1) He earned an
electronics certificate in August 1985. (GE 1)
Applicant’s mother still resides in Vietnam. (GEs 1, 2, and 4; Tr. 27) He
communicates with her once or twice a year and sends her $500 to $1,000 a year for
her support. (GE 4; Tr. 27-28) His mother has never held any position or affiliation with
the Vietnamese government or military and receives no financial benefits from the
government. (Tr. 28-29)
Applicant has an older brother and three younger brothers who are citizens and
residents of Vietnam. (GE 2; Tr. 30-32) He communicates with them once or twice a
year. (Tr. 32) His oldest brother owns a small house and has never served in the South
Vietnamese army or held a position or affiliation with the Vietnamese government. (Tr.
29-30)
Applicant owns property in the United States and has no intent of ever returning
to Vietnam. (Tr. 35) Since immigrating to the United States, he has twice traveled to
Vietnam to visit his family: once in 1998 and once in 2001. (GEs 2 and  4; Tr. 30-31)
Applicant  maintains only a U.S. passport and has never possessed a Vietnamese
passport. (GE 2) Applicant has no property or inheritance rights in Vietnam and retains
no privileges, benefits, or obligations in Vietnam. (GE 2)
Country information on Vietnam 
Vietnam is a single-party constitutional republic controlled by the Communist
Party. (Background Note: Vietnam, supra, at 3) Vietnam is an authoritarian state ruled
by the Communist Party. China established economic ties with Vietnam in 1991 and
remains Vietnam’s largest trading partner. (Id.) With a population of over 90 million
residents, Vietnam’s identity has been shaped by longstanding running conflicts with
internal and foreign forces. (Background Note: Vietnam, id., at 3-4) With the fall of
4
Saigon in 1975, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (the north) absorbed the former
Republic of Vietnam (the south) to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in 1976.
(Background Note: Vietnam, id., at 6) Following reunification, the Vietnamese
government confiscated privately owned land and forced civilians to adopt collectivized
agricultural practices. (Id., at 6-7)
Although the United States has enjoyed “virtually normalized relations” with
Vietnam since the mid-1990s, tensions remain. Albeit, tensions were improved by the
U.S.-Vietnam bilateral trade agreement (BTA) of 2001. ((Background Note: Vietnam, id.,
at 9) As the result of the BTA, there has been an expansion of trade between the two
countries, rising from $2.97 billion in 2002 to $16.6 billion in 2010. (Id.) The United
States is Vietnam’s second largest trading partner after China. And in 2006, Vietnam
was granted permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) status by the United States. (Id.) 
U.S.-Vietnam relations have been increasingly cooperative and broad-based since
normalization. A series of bilateral summits have helped to improve ties. (Id., at 12-13) 
Still, human rights conditions in Vietnam are poor and continue to be a source of
contention in U.S.-Vietnam relations. Despite laws protecting freedoms of speech and
the press, the Vietnamese government has continued to restrict those freedoms,
including control over the internet and limitations on citizen privacy rights. (Background
Note: Vietnam, id., at 13)
When traveling to Vietnam, foreign passport holders are required to both register
to be permitted to stay in private home and must register with police when they stay
overnight in locations outside of their homes. (Background Note: Vietnam, id., at 15-16)
The Vietnam government has encouraged visitation and investment by emigrants, but
sometimes monitors them carefully. (Id.) Vietnamese security personnel may place
foreign visitors under surveillance, and may monitor hotel rooms, phone conversations,
fax transmissions, and email communications. 
Further, there have been instances where local security officers have questioned
some U.S. citizens of Vietnamese origin for discussions not related to any suspected
violation of the law. Notwithstanding a 1994 agreement between the United States and
Vietnam that provides for immediate notification of and reciprocal access within 96
hours to each other’s detained citizens, U.S. consular officers are rarely notified of
detained U.S. citizens, especially when the Vietnamese government considers the
person to be a Vietnamese citizen. (Id.) 
Security violations
Applicant committed several security violations between 2009 and 2010 while
employed by his current employer. Charged with responsibility for leaving a building
insecure in March 2009, he received a verbal warning and was briefed on proper
handling of classified systems. (Tr. 38) Several days later, Applicant was detected with
two safe combinations he had written on a piece of paper he placed in his wallet. (GE 2;
5
Tr.  38-40) For this security violation, he received a written warning and was briefed
again on proper handling and storage of classified information. (GE 3; Tr. 40)
 
In January 2010, Applicant improperly transferred classified hardware from a
remote campus building to another campus building without authorization from his
command. One week prior to this incident (in December 2009), he was given a courier
briefing on the proper methods for transporting classified material. (GE 3) Incident
reports reveal that Applicant carried the classified material in a single-wrapped opaque
envelope that his company provided for transporting classified materials between offices
and labs on the main campus. (GE 3) This single-wrapped envelope did not meet
double-wrapping and labeling requirements for transporting classified information. (GE
3) Records reveal that Applicant’s mishandling of classified materials did not result in
any compromise, or suspected compromise, of any classified information. (GE 3)
Based on a thorough review of the incident reports and Applicant’s received
statements, inferences warrant that none of the covered violations resulted from any
knowing and wilful disregard of established procedures for protecting installations
housing classified materials, or for transporting classified materials. (Tr. 38-40)
However, each of his actions reflect carelessness and inattention to established
procedures for protecting classified facilities and transported classified materials. 
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements from his employer or community.
Nor did he provide any performance evaluations or other testaments to his overall
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
6
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Handling Protected Information      
The Concern: Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises
doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security
              c  o  n  c  e  r n  .                                           
      Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication
under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is
located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.   See
AG ¶ 6.
7
                    B urden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is an electronics technician for a defense contractor who committed
several security violations over a short period of time spanning March 2009 and January
2010. His reported violations reflect a pattern of careless and negligent safeguarding of
classified facilities and materials under his control. Applicant was born and raised in
Vietnam to parents of Vietnamese descent and became a naturalized citizen of the
United States in 2009. Both his mother and older brother are citizens and residents of
Vietnam, a country known for its improving U.S. bilateral relations and growing respect
for the rule of law in their trade and commercial relations. Because of Vietnam’s poor
human rights record, it poses some heightened risks and additional security concerns
about the status of Applicant’s family members residing there.
8
Security violation concerns
Applicant presents with a long history of service to his current employer: almost 14
years. Beginning in March 2009, Applicant committed a series of security breaches in
safeguarding buildings housing classified materials and transporting classified materials
without required double wrapping. His actions reflect pattern instances of negligent
building safeguarding and transporting of classified materials on his part, but no
intentional disregard of security regulations and employer security requirements.  
The importance of safeguarding classified facilities and materials cannot be
overemphasized. Protecting the nation’s security interests against the risks of foreign
coercion and intimidation remains a core governmental responsibility that finds roots in
the early federalist papers (e.g., Federalist No. 8 (Hamilton), “Safety from external danger
is the most powerful director of national conduct.  Even the ardent love of liberty will, after
a time, give way to its dictates”) and enjoys the sustaining force of the courts. Cf. United
States v. Curtiss-Wright Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 319-20 (1936). Put in geopolitical terms,
national security policy implies a state of continuing readiness to take the necessary steps
to maintain our national independence. Cf. H. Lasswell, National Security and Individual
Freedom 51 (1950, reprinted 1971). 
As a fiduciary of the Government with assigned administrative and courier
responsibilities, Applicant was duti-bound to exercise not only personal accountability
over the facility under his control, but prudent courier responsibility over his transporting
of classified materials. Holding a personal security clearance draws upon the highest
fiducial burdens imposed on persons with access to facilities covered by the National
Industrial Security Policy Manual (NISPOM) and implementing DoD security regulations.
These imposed security requirements enable the Government to rightfully claim strict
adherence to governing trust responsibilities that justifiably inhere in the trust relationship
extant between Applicant and DoD. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511n.6
(1980).  Applicant can and should be held accountable for security violations that occur in
his facility and which are caused by or result from his failure to properly safeguard
building security and courier requirements. See DISCR OSD No. 89-0781 (February 23,
1993).
Applicant’s admitted security violations invite application of two disqualifying
conditions of the AGs for handling protected information. DC ¶ 34(g), “any failure to
comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information;” and DC ¶
34(h), “negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by management.”
Applicant’s failure to properly secure his employer’s buildings under his control and
properly wrap the classified materials he transported from his facility collectively reflect a
pattern of lax security measures and disregard of established rules for protecting
buildings designed to store classified materials and wrapping/labeling requirements for
transporting classified materials. Applicant committed these breaches of security despite
his prior briefings and warnings on proper methods for safeguarding classified storage
facilities and transporting classified materials.
9
Applicant claims little extenuation in his defense. That his security breaches were
not intentional does not excuse him from an inferred pattern of negligent behavior and
rules violations.  Briefed and warned before and after the covered incidents (still of recent
occurrence), he cannot credibly claim the absence of proper security briefing. On this
record, Applicant cannot qualify for either MC ¶ 35(a), “so much time has elapsed since
the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;” MC ¶ 35(b), “the individual responded favorably to counseling or
remedial security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge
of security responsibilities;” or MC ¶ 35(c), “the security violations were due to improper or
inadequate training.” 
To Applicant’s credit, he has shown understanding and appreciation of his
safeguarding mistakes and pledges to exercise improved protection and handling
procedures in the future.  But given his pattern of lax building protection and handling of
classified materials he has demonstrated in the past, his assurances are not enough to
surmount the serious concerns raised about Applicant’s safeguarding classified storage
facilities and transporting classified and protected materials in the foreseeable future.
Seasoning of Applicant’s compliance restoration efforts remains a legitimate Government
expectation. And in his mitigation efforts, Applicant can claim no more than two-plus years
of compliance with his company’s safeguarding and handling rules, practices, and
procedures. In the final analysis, conclusions warrant that Applicant requires additional
time to demonstrate his enduring commitment to safeguarding his classified buildings and
transported classified materials. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has not provided any additional
materials (such as endorsements and personnel evaluations) to better appraise his
overall reliability and trustworthiness in safeguarding buildings and classified materials.
Because of the special care requirements typically imposed on security violation
assessments, positive endorsements and evaluations are always important in evaluating
an applicant’s overall reliability and trustworthiness.  
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicants’s
covered security violations, Applicant does not mitigate security concerns over his record
of mishandling building security and courier responsibilities entrusted to him in 2009 and
2010. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations contained in
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of the handling protected information guideline.
Foreign Influence concerns
Foreign influence concerns are raised, too, over the presence of members of
Applicant’s family (i.e., his mother and older brother) who are or have been citizens of
Vietnam, a country historically beset with human rights issues and geopolitical tensions
with the United States. Because Applicant’s mother and older brother are still citizens and
residents of Vietnam, they present some potential security risks covered by disqualifying
10
condition (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. 
The citizenship and residence status of Applicant’s mother and older brother in
Vietnam pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign
influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information under Applicant's
possession and/or control. Risks are considerably lessened, however, by the absence of
any affiliations or contacts of family members with Vietnamese officials currently known to
be associated with intelligence or military organizations interested in collecting proprietary
or sensitive information in the United States. 
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s 
family members have any (a) political affiliations with the Vietnamese government or
military, (b) history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or (c) appear
to be vulnerable to the same. Vietnam, although a country with reported human rights
issues and human rights violations, enjoys an improving bilateral relationship with the
United States, with a strong respect for the rule of law in the areas of foreign trade and
commerce. While Vietnam has a documented record of illegal arrests and detentions,
kidnaping, and human trafficking, it generally enjoys stable diplomatic and trade
relationships with the United States.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical need be weighed
on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the country
information about Vietnam.  
Vietnam remains a valuable trading partner and a country with institutions that are
increasingly compatible with our traditions and respect for the rule of law. The AGs do
take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with the United States as an
important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and
residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies
of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. Vietnam, while reported to have
terrorism, human rights, and human trafficking issues in certain parts of the country, is still
a country with no known recent history of government-sponsored hostage taking or
disposition for exerting undue influence against family members to obtain either classified
information, or unclassified economic and proprietary data. 
As for security concerns associated with the Vietnamese citizenship status of
Applicant’s mother and older brother, any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation
or undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or
economic or proprietary data out of Applicant through his family members residing in
11
Vietnam is quite remote. Applicant, accordingly, may take advantage of one important
mitigating condition: MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons
in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S.” 
MC ¶ (8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal or
the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” has application, too, to Applicant’s situation. Since immigrating to the United
States in 1981, Applicant has demonstrated loyalty and professional commitments to this
country. Whatever potential conflicts he may have through his prior dual Vietnamese
citizenship and contacts with his family members in Vietnam have been more than
counterbalanced by his demonstrated U.S. citizenship responsibilities. Any conflict risks
are further reduced by the lack of any Applicant financial interests in Vietnam and
corresponding material financial interests in the United States.
In appraising risks associated with Applicant’s Vietnamese family relationships,
considerable weight is accorded Vietnam’s improving bilateral relations with the United
States, the lack of any cognizable potential conflicts between Applicant and members of
his family, the U.S. residency status of his family members, and the absence of any
detectable Applicant financial interests in Vietnam (and corresponding material interests
in the United States). When considered together, any risk of undue foreign influence on
Applicant and his family members is insubstantial, and clearly not of the magnitude that
could make them subject to a heightened security risk of coercion, pressure or
compromise under the foreign influence guideline.
Whole-person assessment is helpful to Applicant in surmounting security concerns
over his family members who are citizens and residents of Vietnam. Vietnam in balance
presents no heightened country risks, and Applicant’s family members residing in the
country do not place Applicant at any known risks of pressure or coercion. 
Considering all of the facts and circumstances surrounding the continuing Vietnam
citizenship and residence status of Applicants’s mother and elder brother, Applicant
mitigates security concerns over the status of his family members residing in Vietnam.
Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the foreign
influence guideline.  
    
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
12
       GUIDELINE K (HANDLING PROTECTED INFORMATION):AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.c:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):      FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a and 2.b:      For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
