 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10994   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Although Applicant has resolved two of the delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR, the remaining eight accounts, totaling over $17,000, remain unresolved. She did 
not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision 
because she failed to substantiate her claim of ongoing payments toward the 
unresolved delinquent accounts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March 8, 2012, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 3, 2012. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on May 9, 2012, and 
chose not to submit a response. Accordingly, the documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. The case was assigned to 
me on July 19, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 42, has worked as a federal contractor since May 2010. This is her 
first application for a security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes ten delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $21,353. Her financial problems began in the early 2000s. Between 2000 
and 2002, Applicant opened seven consumer credit accounts, which she used for 
personal and business expenses. After the janitorial business she owned and operated 
between 2005 and 2008 failed, she was unemployed for a total of 11 months between 
January 2009 and May 2010.  As a result, she became unable to repay her outstanding 
debts and the accounts became delinquent.3  
 
 Applicant admits that she is responsible for the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.e., as well as ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j. She denies ¶¶ 1.f. through 1.h., without explanation.  
Applicant has resolved two of the debts alleged in the SOR: ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e. She claims 
to have resolved the debt alleged in ¶ 1.i. by the capture of her state income tax refund. 
Applicant’s August 2010 credit report characterizes the debt alleged in ¶ 1.i. as a 
miscellaneous government debt incurred to Applicant’s city of residence in March 2009. 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided documentation suggesting that 
the debt was related to her outstanding state tax liability for the years 2008 and 2009, 
which has since been resolved by refund capture. However, the documents do not 
appear to be related to ¶ 1.i. Applicant did not provide any explanation connecting the 
tax documents to the allegation.4  
 
 Applicant also claims to have made payments towards the debts alleged in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.c. and 1.j. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided bank 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 8. 
 
4 GE 3, 5, 7. 
 
3 
 
statements for periods ending in September 2010 and May 2011. However, she did not 
indicate the purpose of these documents. Aside from two payments on the debt alleged 
in ¶ 1.a. in September 2010 totaling $778, there is no indication that she made any 
payments on SOR debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., or 1.j. before the issuance of the SOR. 
She has also failed to provide documentation of payments on these debts since then.5 
 
 Applicant has not obtained financial counseling or consulted a debt consolidation 
service. With $571 of disposable income each month, Applicant states that she is able 
to meet her current living expenses and is living day to day.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                          
5 GE 3. 
 
6 GE 7-8. 
 
4 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Two of the disqualifying conditions under ¶ AG 19  apply: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant became unable to pay her outstanding debt after her business failed in 
2008 and she experienced 11 months of unemployment before she started her current 
job. Although she denies responsibility for the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.f. through 1.h, the 
debts are substantiated by her credit reports. 
  
 Of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 20, two are partially applicable 
to this case.  
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and  
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a combination of events beyond 
her control and her excessive use of consumer credit. However, she failed to provide 
evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. While Applicant has 
resolved two of the accounts alleged in the SOR, ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e., the other eight debts 
remain unresolved. In 2010, Applicant made two payments toward the debt alleged in ¶ 
1.a., however this is not sufficient to establish a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent debt. Applicant’s claim that she has made payments on four of the alleged 
debts, ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.i., and 1.j., is not supported by the record. In the absence of an 
explanation by Applicant, neither the descriptions of transactions in the bank statements 
nor the tax records she submitted match any of the accounts alleged in the SOR. As 
such, I am unable to determine whether she has made any payments on these 
accounts. With respect to the debts she denies, ¶¶ 1.f. through 1.h., Applicant failed to 
provide any explanation refuting the legitimacy of the debts or evidence that she 
challenged the debts with the creditors or the credit reporting agencies.  
 
In addition, Applicant has not received any financial counseling and there is no 
indication that her finances are under control. Applicant’s ability to maintain her current 
monthly obligations does not diminish the record evidence that she is unable to satisfy 
 
5 
 
her delinquent debt.7 Consequently, Applicant has failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
concerns raised in this case.  
 In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept. Applicant’s financial problems were partially caused by events beyond her 
control. However, she did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable clearance decision. As such, her request for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
    
  Subparagraphs 1.d. – 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7  See ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
