 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case  No. 11-00213    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by her 2002 travel to 
Cuba and her sporadic contact with a cousin who is a citizen and resident of that 
country. Clearance is granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 1, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline. DOHA 
recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on April 19, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled on June 21, 
2012. At hearing, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through C without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 
2012. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Without objection from Applicant, I approved Department Counsel’s request that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Cuba. The related documents have 
been included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The pertinent facts are set out in 
the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 60, is a U.S. citizen by birth. She has never lived outside the United 
States. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from Cuba. Applicant’s parents 
met and married in the early 1950s when her father was stationed at the U.S. Naval 
Station at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Her father and brother are residents and citizens of 
the United States. Applicant has work for a federal contractor since 1978. She has held 
a security clearance, without incident for the past 28 years.2 
  
 In 2002, Applicant legally traveled to Cuba with her then 69-year-old mother. 
According to her supervisor, Applicant’s travel to Cuba did not raise any issues with her 
security clearance or job status. Neither Applicant nor her mother has returned to Cuba 
since their 2002 trip. Before the trip, Applicant did not have any contact with her Cuban 
family members. In the years following the trip, Applicant’s Cuban relatives would 
occasionally call her home to share news about the family with her mother. Applicant’s 
mother stopped accepting the phone calls when they became cost prohibitive, 
effectively ending communication with her family. Applicant surmises that her mother 
discontinued contact because she could not bear hearing news of Applicant’s 
grandmother’s declining health.3 
 
 After Applicant’s grandmother died in 2008, neither Applicant nor her mother 
attended the funeral. In 2010, Applicant’s cousin, a citizen and resident of Cuba, started 
sending her e-mails containing information about the family. This year, Applicant has 
received four messages dealing with the death of her uncle. Applicant responds to the 
e-mails on her mother’s behalf. Aside from these occasional e-mails, Applicant does not 
maintain independent contact with her Cuban relatives.4   
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 21-26; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 29, 33-34, 39-41; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. 34, 37-38; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
Cuba5 
  
 Cuba is a totalitarian state controlled by the Cuban Communist Party. The 
country has long targeted the United States for espionage activities. Since the 1980s, 
there have been numerous cases of espionage against the United States sanctioned 
and supported by the Cuban government, including the convictions of U.S. citizens and 
at least three U.S. government officials. In addition to denying its citizens basic human 
rights, the Cuban government conducts surveillance of foreign travelers. Americans 
traveling in Cuba may be subject to surreptitious scrutiny by its government’s secret 
police. 
 The United States does not have a full diplomatic relationship with Cuba, which 
has been designated a state sponsor of terrorism. Because of the broad embargo 
against trade with Cuba, Americans traveling to Cuba must first obtain a license to 
travel to, from, and within the country. General traveling licenses are granted to persons 
visiting a close relative (any individual related to a person by blood, marriage, or 
adoption who is no more than three generations removed from that person or from a 
common ancestor with that person) who is a national of Cuba. There is no limit on the 
duration or frequency of such travel. These travelers are permitted to spend money to 
travel to Cuba and to engage in other transactions directly incident to the purpose of 
their travel, without the need to obtain a specific license from the Department of the 
Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).  
Policies 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 HE 1. 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”6  
 
Under AG ¶ 7, the following disqualifying condition applies:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant traveled to Cuba in 2002 and that she has a 
cousin who is a resident and citizen of Cuba. Foreign travel alone is not disqualifying 
under Guideline B. Furthermore, Applicant appears to have traveled to the country 
legally. However, Applicant’s relationship with a citizen and resident of Cuba may be 
disqualifying. A close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country is 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
5 
 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Other considerations relevant in assessing the 
risk of foreign influence and the likelihood that an applicant’s family member may be 
vulnerable to government coercion or inducement include: the nature of the country’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record. The 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has 
an authoritarian government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent 
upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. Having contacts with a relative in Cuba has the 
potential to create a heightened risk. 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by this relationship. The 
following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 In 2002, Applicant met her Cuban family on a one-time trip to that country. Before 
the trip, Applicant did not have contact with her extended family members in Cuba. 
Since the trip, one cousin sporadically sends e-mails to Applicant to update her mother 
about her surviving family members. Given the casual and infrequent nature of this 
relationship there is little likelihood that there is a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the relationship between 
Applicant and her cousin, or even her mother’s now-distant relationship with her Cuban 
relatives, could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between U.S. interests 
and her Cuban family. Applicant’s loyalties and longstanding relationships are in the 
United States, not Cuba. She can be reasonably expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked as a federal 
 
6 
 
contractor for more than 30 years, holding a security clearance for 28 years without 
incident. The evidence supports a finding that Applicant does not have divided loyalties 
between the United States and Cuba. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant 
has mitigated the Guideline B concerns raised in this case. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility to classified 
information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
