 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06451 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are due, in part, to his 2005 financial criminal 
misconduct. Additionally, he failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for 
a number of years and acquired a substantial debt to the IRS. He also has 11 
delinquent consumer debts, and two unpaid student loans. He made some efforts to 
resolve his IRS debt. However, the record evidence fails to establish Applicant’s 
financial responsibility in the acquisition and resolution of his delinquent debts. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 24, 2010. On 
April 5, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on April 17, 2012, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
 
2 
 
 
 
A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 14, 2012, was 
provided to him by transmittal letter dated June 18, 2012. Applicant received the FORM 
on July 2, 2012. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to 
provide material in extenuation and mitigation. He timely responded to the FORM on 
July 12, 2012, and provided additional information that was made part of the record. 
The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, and 1.h 
through 1.q. He denied the allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, and 1.g. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence 
of record, including his answers to the SOR, the FORM, and two DOHA interrogatories, 
I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He married his 
spouse in February 1982, and they have three grown daughters. He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in business administration in January 2002. Applicant served on 
active duty as an enlisted in the U.S. Army from October 1979 until October 1981, and 
in the Air National Guard from January 1985 until July 2001. His time in service was 
characterized as honorable. Applicant was granted access to classified information at 
the secret level by the Defense Department in January 1985, which he apparently held 
until his discharge. (Item 5, SCA) 
 
In the early 2000s, Applicant was employed as an accountant in a city’s finance 
department. In 2002, he misused the city’s credit card and filed fraudulent travel 
vouchers. He improperly charged as much as $2,500 a month on his employer’s card to 
pay for cigarettes, food, and alcohol. He resigned his position shortly after an audit 
disclosed his criminal behavior. In January 2005, he was charged with fraudulent 
scheme (felony 2) and theft (felony 3). He pled guilty to a reduced charge of theft (felony 
5), and was sentenced to three years supervised probation and he was required to 
make restitution of $18,000. He completed his probation in February 2008, and the 
guilty judgment was set aside in May 2009. 
 
Applicant was unemployed from November 2002 until May 2003, and from May 
2009 until July 2009. From June 2003 until April 2009, he worked as a network 
administrator for a not-for-profit organization, and part-time as a pizza delivery man. He 
has been consistently and fully employed as an expeditionary instrumentation systems 
technician for a government contractor from July 2009 to present. As of April 2012, his 
hourly base rate pay was $15.54.  
 
                                                                                                                                             
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed in his May 2010 SCA (Section 22 - Police Record) that he 
was convicted of theft (felony 5) in July 2005. He explained that his then alcohol 
consumption impaired his judgment and contributed to him misusing his employer’s 
credit card. (Section 24 – Use of Alcohol). He also disclosed that he had financial 
problems, which included his failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns 
and his failure to pay Federal and state income taxes. He also had judgments filed 
against him, numerous delinquent debts in collection or charged off, and had his wages 
garnished by creditors. (Section 26 – Financial Record) His background investigation 
addressed his financial problems and revealed the debts alleged in the SOR, which are 
established by the evidence. 
 
In September 2010, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator 
about his 2005 theft conviction, delinquent debts, and his overall financial situation. 
Applicant explained that his financial problems began while he was unemployed from 
November 2002 until June 2003. He resigned his position because of an audit and a 
criminal investigation against him for theft and fraudulent scheme. He was employed 
from June 2003 until April 2009, but he took a reduction in pay. And, he was 
unemployed from May 2009 until July 2009, when he accompanied his spouse 
overseas. 
 
During the September 2010 interview, Applicant admitted owing the IRS 
approximately $27,000 for income tax due for years 2002 through 2010. He claimed he 
had filed federal and state personal income tax returns for those years. He explained 
that the IRS was garnishing his income tax returns and applying it to his debt, and that 
he was making additional periodic payments.  
 
Applicant’s IRS documents (submitted with his answer to the FORM) show that 
he filed his 2002 income tax return in September 2005. As of September 2011, he owed 
$2,380 in past due income taxes. He filed his 2003 income tax return in October 2004. 
He did not file income tax returns for tax years 2004 and 2005, and the IRS filed 
substitute income tax returns for him for both tax years. As of September 2011, he owed 
$4,584 for tax year 2004 and $6,509 for tax year 2005.  
 
Applicant filed his 2006, 2007, and 2008 income tax returns in August 2011. As 
of September 2011, he owed $5,574 for tax year 2006; $2,787 for tax year 2007; and 
$4,503 for tax year 2008. The IRS imposed late filing penalties, failure to pay tax 
penalties, and assessed interest against Applicant for tax years 2002 through 2008. 
Applicant timely filed his 2009 and 2010 income tax returns. 
 
The IRS levied and was collecting from the proceeds of a rental property 
Applicant owns in the United States. Applicant’s rental owner statement shows the IRS 
collected $7,695. The IRS also levied and was collecting from his pay check. In May 
2011, Applicant issued a $6,000 check to the IRS. Additionally, in April 2012, Applicant 
entered into an agreement with the IRS to pay $500 a month until the debt is satisfied. 
In his response to the August 2011 DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he did 
 
4 
 
 
not file state income tax returns during the seven years preceding his May 2010 SCA. 
The extent of his debt to the state, if any, is not known. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied ¶ 1.a, and claimed that he was no 
longer indebted to the IRS in the amount of $27,000. He asserted that he had paid over 
$30,000 in past-due income tax payments, including interest and penalties imposed. He 
did not present clear evidence as to how much he currently owes the IRS. 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.b, because as of his answer to the SOR, he had filed 
all of his past-due income tax returns. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant admitted he did 
not file state taxes for tax years 2004 through 2008. He claimed that he had filed state 
taxes for tax years 2009 through 2011. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, and 
claimed that the alleged delinquent student loans were currently in forbearance. He 
failed to submit documentary evidence to support both claims. There is no documentary 
evidence showing when the student loans were placed on forbearance and when the 
forbearance will lapse. 
 
Applicant admitted all remaining SOR allegations. He stated that he was unable 
to pay those delinquent debts because of his periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, and his obligation to pay first the court-ordered restitution, and the 
levies imposed by the IRS. Applicant claimed he had paid some of his delinquent debts, 
including two for issuing check without sufficient funds. However, Applicant presented 
no documentary evidence of payments made, contacts with creditors, or of any other 
actions taken to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant presented no evidence to show 
he has received financial counseling or that he follows a budget 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
In 2005, Applicant was convicted of theft (felony 5) for abusing his employer’s 
credit card and filing false travel vouchers. He failed to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2002 through 2008, and acquired a significant debt to 
the IRS. In 2011, he started to make payments to the IRS to satisfy tax liens and 
collection levies. Although he has made substantial payments to the IRS, the extent of 
his current debt to the IRS and to his state are not clear.  
 
Additionally, he has 15 debts that have been delinquent for a number of years, 
including two student loans. The aggregate total of the consumer debts alleged in the 
SOR is over $49,000, including his two student loans. This does not include his debt to 
the IRS and his state for past-due income taxes. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts;” AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” AG ¶ 19(d): 
“deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, check 
fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and 
other intentional financial breaches of trust;” and AG ¶ 19(g): “failure to file annual 
 
6 
 
 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s favorable evidence fails to fully establish the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing, he has an extensive delinquent 
debt, and the evidence fails to show that he acquired the debt under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment and underemployment were due, in part, to 
his financial criminal misconduct. Applicant’s favorable evidence is not sufficient to show 
that he acted responsibly in the acquisition of his debts, or that he has been responsible 
in addressing his financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 The available evidence fails to explain Applicant’s failure to address his 
delinquent consumer debt in a timely and responsible manner. I considered that 
Applicant made some efforts to resolve his debts by establishing a payment plan with 
the IRS. However, questions remain about his current financial situation and his ability 
and willingness to continue making his ongoing payments. On balance, the evidence 
available is not sufficient to establish that Applicant has a track record of financial 
responsibility.  
 
7 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant presented no evidence to show he received 
financial counseling or that he follows a budget. Considering the number of debts and 
the aggregate total of the debts, I cannot find that there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. The remaining mitigating 
conditions (AG ¶¶ 20(e) and (f)) are not reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has been making some efforts to resolve his financial problems. 
However, the record evidence fails to establish Applicant’s financial responsibility in the 
acquisition and resolution of his delinquent debts. The record evidence fails to convince 
me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
