 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case  No. 11-06421    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns raised by his 
relationships with family members who are citizens and residents of Saudi Arabia – in 
particular, his father who is a general officer in the Saudi military. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s exercise of his Saudi citizenship, in the form of accepting sizable education 
benefits, indicates a foreign preference, which Applicant also failed to mitigate. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 12, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign 
preference guidelines. DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative 
judge for a determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant, through counsel, timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled on 
May 10, 2012. Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were also 
admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until May 18, 
2012 to allow him to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted AE L and M, 
which were admitted without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 2012. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Saudi Arabia. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The 
request and the attached documents have been included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1. The pertinent facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old U.S. citizen by birth. He is also a citizen of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. He is a software engineer employed by a federal contractor. 
In 2007, Applicant was granted a public trust position. He applied for access to 
classified information in 2010.2 
 
Raised in Saudi Arabia, Applicant returned to the United States in 2000 to attend 
college. He received his undergraduate and graduate degrees from U.S. universities 
and is currently enrolled in a post-graduate program. As a citizen of Saudi Arabia, 
Applicant’s education has been paid for by the Saudi Arabian government. After 
entering college in 2001, he received the maximum ten years of benefits provided to 
Saudi citizens, including tuition, health insurance, and a monthly stipend to cover living 
expenses. His education benefits expired in May 2012.3  
 
Applicant married in October 2010. His wife is a citizen of Saudi Arabia living in 
the United States on a student visa. She is pursuing an undergraduate degree and is 
receiving the same education benefits from the Saudi government as Applicant. The 
couple is expecting their first child the summer of 2012.4 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, and four brothers are citizens of Saudi Arabia. All 
except one brother, who is studying in the United Kingdom, are also residents of Saudi 
Arabia. Applicant’s father is a general officer in the Saudi military. His mother is a 
                                                          
2 Tr. 70; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 25-28, 70-71. 
 
4  Tr. 28-29, 68. 
 
3 
 
housewife. Applicant’s sister, a minor, and two of his younger brothers, both college 
students, reside with his parents. His eldest brother, who is also a dual U.S. citizen, is a 
civilian employee of a Saudi military department. Applicant’s parents, his sister, and two 
younger brothers travel to the United States once or twice a year for two or three 
months, staying with Applicant. Since returning in the United States in 2000, Applicant 
has traveled to Saudi Arabia annually, entering the country using his Saudi passport. 
Outside of their visits, Applicant speaks to his parents every other week by telephone. 
He communicates with his siblings through email or a popular social networking site.5  
 
When Applicant’s father retires, his parents, sister, and his two younger brothers 
plan to immigrate to the United States. Applicant’s father has been planning and 
preparing the family to do so for years. In 2009 Applicant’s father gave Applicant 
$300,000 towards the purchase of a home. Although the house is currently occupied by 
Applicant and his wife, his father plans to live there when he immigrates to the United 
States. To establish a presence in the United States, Applicant’s father has a driver’s 
license issued by the state where the home is located, a U.S. bank account, and a few 
U.S.-issued credit cards. He is also making arrangements for Applicant’s oldest brother 
to transfer his civilian job with the Saudi military to a location in the United States. 
Although Applicant’s father is eligible for retirement, he has not yet been given 
permission to retire. Once retired, he will receive a pension from the Saudi 
government.6  
 
In addition to his immediate family, Applicant’s parents-in-law and two of his 
friends are citizens of Saudi Arabia. Applicant’s father-in-law is an airline pilot and his 
mother-in-law is a housewife. Outside his annual visits to Saudi Arabia and occasional 
visits to the United States by his parents-in-law, Applicant does not maintain regular 
contact with them. However, they do plan to visit after their grandchild is born. One of 
Applicant’s friends is a civilian employee of the Saudi government in a U.S. city. 
Through him, Applicant met his other friend, who is a flight attendant. Applicant sees 
these friends four times a year and they occasionally exchange e-mails.7 
 
Applicant plans to stay in the United States. In February 2012, he surrendered 
his Saudi passport to his facility security officer (FSO). In May 2012, he destroyed the 
document in the FSO’s presence. With his father’s encouragement, in 2010, Applicant 
contacted a Navy recruiter about joining the U.S. Navy Reserve; however, he decided to 
complete his post-doctoral studies before doing so.8   
 
At hearing, Applicant offered several character letters from friends and co-
workers. He is highly regarded by all as a person of upstanding character and integrity. 
Two letters came from Applicant’s co-workers, who have known Applicant’s father for 
                                                          
5 Tr. 29-33, 40, 50-52, 57-58; AE F, H. 
 
6 Tr. 30, 35, 55-56, 64-66; AE B, J. 
 
7 Tr. 35-37, 59-60, 61-64. 
 
8 Tr. 45-46; AE C, D. 
 
4 
 
over 20 years through their work supporting contracts with the Saudi Arabian military. 
Both describe Applicant’s father as being very supportive of U.S. initiatives and 
policies.9 
 
Saudi Arabia10 
 
The central institution of the Saudi Arabian government is the monarchy ruled by 
the Al Saud family and a king chosen by and from the family; the king rules through 
royal decrees. Islamic law is the basis for the authority of the country’s conservative 
customs and social practices. Despite generally good relations, the United States 
remains concerned about human rights conditions in Saudi Arabia. The Unites States 
and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional security, oil exports and 
imports, and sustainable development. However, Saudi Arabia’s relations with the 
United States were strained after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. 
 
During 2003 and 2004, terrorists and suicide bombers kidnapped or killed 
Americans and attacked the U.S. consulate in Jeddah, killing five consulate employees. 
A travel warning is in effect for Saudi Arabia due to concerns about the possibility of 
terrorist activity directed against American citizens and interests. Individuals and 
organizations based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by the U.S. Government as 
providing financial and material support to Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups. Saudi 
and U.S. officials appear confident that Al-Qaeda’s capability to launch attacks inside 
the Kingdom has been seriously degraded. The Saudi government continues to build its 
counterterrorism capacity and efforts to counter extremist ideology. On March 24, 2010, 
Saudi officials announced that since November 2009, the Saudi government has 
arrested more than 100 Al-Qaeda suspects accused of planning attacks against the 
government and oil installations. On November 26, 2010, Saudi officials announced that 
149 Al-Qaeda suspects had been arrested since April; the suspects were planning to 
poison Saudi officials and journalists, and to finance terror operations by robbing banks 
and companies. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
9 AE K. 
 
10 HE 1. 
 
5 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”11  
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that are disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
6 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s wife, parents, siblings, parents-in-law, and two friends are citizens of 
Saudi Arabia. The mere possession of close ties with foreign family members or friends 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members or friends are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent 
upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. However, this inquiry is not limited to countries 
hostile to the United States. Friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.  
 
Despite the long-standing and historically-positive relationship between Saudi 
Arabia and the United States, a heightened risk exists. Terrorist organizations operating 
within the Kingdom routinely target American citizens and interests. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s wife, oldest brother, and in particularly his father have significant 
connections to the Saudi government, which increases the vulnerability of Applicant and 
his family members to government coercion or inducement. The Government presented 
sufficient evidence to establish that Applicant’s ties with citizens of Saudi Arabia are 
disqualifying thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to present evidence in mitigation 
and extenuation that he qualifies for access to classified information. He failed to do so. 
 
Accordingly, none of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 8 apply. 
While Applicant’s relationships with his two friends who are citizens of Saudi Arabia can 
be described as casual and infrequent, his familial relationships cannot. Although not 
disqualifying, Applicant’s annual travel to Saudi Arabia to visit his family and his joint 
purchase of a house with his parents shows the strength of these bonds. They are a 
close knit family organized around Applicant’s father who determines the direction of the 
family, including its adult members. This risk is not mitigated by his family’s plan to 
immigrate to the United States. While they may live on U.S. soil in the future, their ties 
 
7 
 
to the Saudi government will remain. His father will receive a pension from the Saudi 
government. Applicant’s wife, his siblings, and presumably his child will eligible for the 
educational benefits available to Saudi citizens creating additional ties to the Saudi 
government. 
 
In light of his family’s connection to and reliance upon the government of Saudi 
Arabia, Applicant failed to meet his burden showing there is little likelihood that these 
foreign relationships could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation or that they 
do not create potential conflict of interest. While there is no evidence that the 
government of Saudi Arabia or terrorists operating within the Kingdom seeks or has 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his relatives, it is 
not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Applicant should not be placed in 
a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
a desire to assist his relatives living in Saudi Arabia who might be coerced by terrorists 
or other governmental entities in that country. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 As described in AG ¶ 9, a security concern may arise under the following 
circumstances: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10 applies to this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. 
 
 Applicant held and used a Saudi Arabian passport until February 2012. He also 
accepted educational, health, and subsistence benefits from the Saudi Arabian 
government for ten years. 
 
One of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 11 applies: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
authority or otherwise invalidated. 
 
In February 2009, Applicant surrendered his passport to his FSO. Three months 
later, the FSO witnessed Applicant’s destruction of the document. However, this does 
not mitigate the overall foreign preference concern. Between 2001 and May 2012, 
Applicant accepted the maximum amount of educational and related benefits available 
to him from the Saudi government. Applicant continues to experience the financial 
benefit of this entitlement program as his wife is currently receiving the same benefit to 
 
8 
 
pay for her education. The negative security significance of acts indicative of a foreign 
preference is not negated or diminished merely because an applicant engages in those 
acts for personal reasons.12 Nor is the security significance of Applicant’s exercise of his 
rights as a citizen of Saudi Arabia mitigated by his ignorance of negative security 
concerns raised by his accepting the educational assistance to which he was entitled. 
The absence of any sinister motive on Applicant's part does not negate or reduce the 
negative security significance of his conduct.13 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is talented, hardworking, 
and possesses good character and integrity. However, this finding does not preclude a 
finding that Applicant’s facts and circumstances still pose a security risk. Stated 
otherwise, the Government need not prove an applicant is a bad person before it can 
deny or revoke access to classified information.  Even good people can pose a security 
risk because of facts and circumstances not under their control – such as having close 
relatives who are citizens or residents of foreign countries.14 Applicant’s familial 
relationships with individuals directly connected to the Saudi government represent an 
unacceptable risk. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.i. – 1.l.   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 99-0295 at 6. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 99-0511 at 9-10 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2000). 
 
14 ISCR Case No.01-26893 at  8 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002); See also Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 527-28 (1988). 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
  
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
