                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-04988
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jefferys, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 15, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on January 14, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  On February 10,
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive
Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, (as amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 19, 2012, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on April 27, 2012.  The Applicant received the FORM on May 12, 2012.
The Applicant was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation
within 30 days of receipt.  The Applicant failed to submit a reply to the FORM.  This
case was assigned to the undersigned on June 27, 2012.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 36 years old and divorced.  He is employed with a defense
contractor as a Mechanic and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection
with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  He
contends that the debts set forth in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, have been
paid in full.  The others he is currently working to resolve.  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated January 27, 2011; and January 25, 2012, reflect that the Applicant is
indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR, in an amount totaling
approximately $27,300.  (Government Exhibits 7 and 8.)  
The Applicant has a history of financial problems as evidenced by his current
delinquent debts.  He was unemployed for extended periods in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008,
2009 and 2010.  In 2006, the Applicant and his wife divorced.   He began working for his
current employer since January 2011. 
The following delinquent debts set forth in the SOR are outstanding.  
1.a.  A credit card debt in the amount of $1,045 remains owing.  (Government Exhibits
6, 7 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that he has paid off the debt but has submitted no
supporting documentation.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
1.b.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $2,230 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibits 6, 7 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that he is currently working to resolve the
debt.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
1.c.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $512 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibits 5, 6, 7 and 8.) The Applicant contends that the debt has been paid but
submitted no supporting documentation.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
1.d.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $4,797 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibit 5, 6 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that he is currently working to resolve the
debt.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
3
1.e.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $17,287 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibits 5, 6 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that he is currently working to resolve the
debt.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
1.f.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $872 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibits 6 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that the debt has been paid but has submitted
no supporting documentation.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
1.g.  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $564 remains owing.  (Government
Exhibits 5, 6 and 8.)  The Applicant claims that he has paid off the debt but has
submitted no supporting documentation.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
4
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
5
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that some circumstances beyond the Applicant’s control,
namely, long periods of unemployment and a divorce, contributed to his financial
difficulties.  Since January 2011, he has worked full time.  He states that he has paid off
several of the debts and is currently working to resolve the others, but gives no
specifics.  He has failed to provide proof of payment or any documentary evidence in
mitigation to support his statements concerning his delinquent debts.  Without more
information concerning these debts and how they are being resolved, if they are, the
Applicant has failed to establish that he is fiscally responsible. In fact, the record is void
as to evidence in mitigation.
           
Under the particular circumstances of this case, the Applicant has not met his
burden of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a
concrete understanding of his financial responsibilities and has not sufficiently
addressed his delinquent debts in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that he has made a
good-faith effort to resolve his past due indebtedness.  He has not shown that he is or
has been reasonably, responsibly or prudently addressing his financial situation.  He
has failed to explain what is being done to resolve them.  There is no evidence in the
record that he has paid even one of his delinquent debts.  He obviously does not
understand the importance of paying his bills on time.  At this time, there is insufficient
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has not demonstrated that he can
properly handle his financial affairs or that he is fiscally responsible.  His debts are
significant.  Assuming that he works to resolve his debts and then shows that he has not
acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay, he may be eligible for a security
clearance in the future.  However, not at this time.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
6
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  Although Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances, applies, it
is not controlling.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
7
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
