1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-05107
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On March 21, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline H
(Drug Involvement), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline G (Alcohol
Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 14, 2012. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on June 25, 2012, scheduling the hearing for July 26, 2012.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6 were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-F, which were admitted without
objection. I kept the record open for additional documents. Applicant timely submitted
documentation, which was marked as AX G-O. DOHA received the transcript on August
      1Applicant listed employment from October 2010 to the present when he completed his security clearance
application in 2010. However, he was not actually working with the company. The company has offered him
the position, contingent on him obtaining a security clearance. The company is sponsoring him for his security
clearance.
      2Applicant disclosed his alcohol, drug, personal, and financial issues in his 2010 SF-86. He also noted, in
detail, the incidents in his DOHA interrogatories. The Government’s information concerning the allegations
comes from Applicant’s full disclosure.
2
3, 2012.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I
find Applicant met his burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance
is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted and denied the factual allegations
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption),
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1996 and received a diploma from a technical college in 2008.  In 2010,
he obtained another certificate from a technical institute. (AX G) Applicant is single and
has no children. He lives with his mother. He has worked for his current employer since
April 2012. (GX 1)1 This is his first application for a security clearance.
Applicant states that he is proud of his steady progress and his conscious efforts
to improve his life. He is a productive citizen who wants to continue his work and who
does not intend to do anything to jeopardize his position. (AX J)
Applicant submitted seven letters of recommendation from his manager,
colleagues, and friends. He is described as dependable and trustworthy. Applicant has
gained the respect of his peers. (AX F, AX H) Applicant is consistently described as a
smart man who has a strong work ethic and dedication to his job and to his fellow
employees. He responds to situations in a dignified manner. He does not have difficulty
adapting to situations and has proven to be highly proficient in overcoming obstacles.
He is a valued member of the team.
Applicant experienced a traumatic event in January 2002 when he was shot in
his foot by his mother’s boyfriend. His mother was not injured, but Applicant was injured
and hospitalized. (Tr. 54) He described the terror in watching his mother being attacked
by her abusive boyfriend. His attempt to intervene caused him both physical and
emotional suffering. After the incident, Applicant became very depressed and sought
counseling. He reported that his anger at the event caused him to resort to behaviors
that involved alcohol and marijuana. He described his rage and anger because his
mother’s boyfriend shot and killed himself after the incident, leaving Applicant unable to
confront the man. He started drinking to mask the emotional and physical pain.  He
credibly testified that the drug, alcohol, and financial difficulties stem from this one
traumatic event. He admitted that he began having “troubles with the law.”2
3
Applicant worked at his job despite the emotional pain until 2004, when he was
fired. He stated that he did not show up for work because he was suffering from
depression. At that point, he referred himself to a psychiatrist who diagnosed him with a
depressive disorder. (AX A) The report noted that Applicant had “thoughts of suicide”
and difficulty sleeping.  He told the physician that he had not been reporting to work and
had been fired. He related that not a day goes by without reliving the 2002 shooting
event involving his mother. Applicant told the physician that he had used marijuana in
1999 and began to drink alcohol in his adolescent years. Applicant saw the psychiatrist
from May 2004 until September 2004. Applicant took a prescribed antidepressant. The
last progress note stated that Applicant’s appearance was appropriate, and he was
cooperative. The treating physician noted that Applicant’s affect was appropriate and his
judgment intact. (AX A)
Drug Involvement
Applicant noted on his SF-86 that he used marijuana and was arrested for
possession of marijuana in 2003. However, he credibly explained that he was arrested
in 2004. He incorrectly stated the date. The charge was dismissed.  He disclosed in his
DOHA interrogatories that he used marijuana in high school. He admitted occasional
use in 1999 until 2003. (Tr. 115) He denies any marijuana use in 2004 or 2005. He was
on probation and attempted to contact his probation officer to verify his assertion. He
could not locate the officer. He noted that he was a recreational user (maybe twice a
week) prior to 2004.
Applicant states that his drug use is in the past. He regrets his past decisions and
understands the consequences of his behavior. He knows it is illegal. He states that he
has not used marijuana since he was placed on probation on or about early 2004, after
his 2003 DUI conviction. He has taken drug tests for employment since 2008. He
submitted a recent pre-employment drug urinalysis. (AX E) He has developed new
ways to cope with stress, which include a family support network. 
Alcohol Consumption 
Applicant was arrested three times for alcohol incidents. In March 2003, he was
charged with driving under the influence (DUI). He pled guilty and was sentenced to 60
days (suspended) in jail. Applicant was placed on 18 months of unsupervised probation.
He had been sleeping behind the wheel of his car when a police officer stopped and
woke him up. He was told to get out of the car and was arrested for DUI because he
was asleep behind the wheel. 
 In May 2005, when Applicant was stopped for speeding, an open container of
alcohol was observed in his car. Applicant was charged with DUI, to which he pled
guilty. He served 30 days in jail and was required to undergo alcohol treatment.
Applicant attended the court-ordered alcohol inpatient treatment program from
September 22, 2005 until October 19, 2005. He attended both group and individual
counseling. There is nothing in the record concerning any diagnosis of alcohol abuse or
dependency. He admitted that he continued to drink after the release from the
      3He was candid that he sold his home and his truck. He split the money with his mother and used it to pay
living expenses while unemployed. He also stated that he tried to open a business.  
4
rehabilitation program. He stated that alcohol was his crutch that managed his hurt,
pain, disgust, and fear. (Tr. 34) . 
 In June 2007, Applicant was charged with operating a motor vehicle after his
license had been revoked.  He pled guilty and received six months of unsupervised
probation. His license was suspended.
Applicant was adamant that he was not arrested in December 2006 for driving on
a suspended license. (Tr. 73) He provided a criminal history that validated his assertion.
(AX N) He was arrested in June 2007 for possession of an open container in his car.
(Tr. 77)   He received unsupervised probation and paid a fine.  He has no record of any
arrests after 2007.
In response to the DOHA 2012 interrogatories, he admitted drinking beer, but not
to the point of intoxication. He stated that he is in the process of weaning himself from
alcohol. He has modified his drinking to perhaps four beers during a 24-hour period on a
special occasion. (GE 2) At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has decided to stop
drinking alcohol entirely. He stated his last drink was in January 2012 while watching a
football game with friends. 
Financial
The SOR lists seven delinquent accounts totaling approximately $19,100.
Applicant admitted that he was indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for
federal income taxes in the amount of $8,469; to the State for a tax lien in the amount of
$1,783; to the State for a tax lien in the amount of $1,208; to a car account for the
amount of $6,665; and to an insurance company for $427. He denied that he is indebted
to Genesis for $2,604 because it has been settled and paid. He also denied his
indebtedness to UNI COL for $165 because the debt has been paid. (AX O)  He paid
the insurance company  account in the amount of $427. (AX I) 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2004 when he lost his job. At that time,
he was earning a salary of approximately $60,000 and was able to pay his bills and
maintain his daily expenses. He had purchased a home in 2001 and owned a truck. The
home was co-owned by his mother. He sold the home in 2005.3 He was responsible in
his financial affairs. When he lost the job in 2004, he could not find any full-time
employment until 2008. He attempted to open a business, but was not successful due to
the economy. He worked at temporary positions, and in 2009 he started part-time work
as a security guard. He also suffered unemployment in late 2009 and again in late 2011
and 2012. He could not maintain his bills. He was offered a well-paying position in 2010,
but the offer was contingent on his obtaining a security clearance. 
Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in 2012. Regarding his financial
situation, he explained that he has paid several accounts and that he has the other
5
accounts in payment plans. He submitted documentation from the IRS and the State,
showing that he is in repayment status. Specifically, he has been paying the IRS $100
per month since January 2012. His tax refund for 2011 was applied to the IRS account.
(AX C) He has been paying the State $93 a month since March 2012. (AX C) He
produced documentation of payment for all accounts. Prior to the SOR, Applicant had
paid several other accounts. His credit reports reflect many accounts that are “pays as
agreed.” Applicant has a payment plan for his car account of $6,665. He produced a
settlement agreement with his answer to the SOR that shows a $100 a month payment
for 33 months. He has made payments. (AX M) 
Applicant has a budget. (AX L)  Applicant’s  monthly net income is $2,000. After
expenses, his net remainder is approximately $1,300.  He has recently started to work
on weekends to help pay his bills. He has a small savings account and a checking
account. His mother recently helped Applicant to purchase a used car to enable him to
work delivery jobs on weekends. (Tr. 89) He had saved $1,400 toward the car cost of
$2,500. Thus, he has shown that even in difficult times, he has the ability to save and
pay his bills. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
      4 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      7 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      9 Id.
6
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”4 The burden of proof is something less than a
preponderance of evidence.5 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.6 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”7 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.9 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
7
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment
program;
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by
a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant admitted his use of illegal drugs (marijuana) from 1999 until 2003
before his first DUI arrest. He also purchased marijuana. He was arrested and charged
with marijuana on March 2004 for possession with intent to distribute. The charge was
later dismissed. AG¶ 25(a) and 25(c)apply. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
8
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in 2003, and his marijuana arrest was in
2004. He credibly states that he has not used any illegal drugs since that time. He has
no intention of using any illegal drugs. His eight-year abstinence from drug use reflects
good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness as well as a change in his life-style and
environment. He submitted a negative test result from a drug screening for employment,
dated March 2012.  AG¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
9
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program;
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and,
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education,
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
Applicant has three alcohol incidents from 2003 until 2007. He was arrested in
2003 and 2005 for DUI and pled guilty. In 2007, he pled guilty to possession of an open
container of alcohol, for which he was placed on unsupervised probation. AG ¶ 22(a)
and (c) apply.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
10
After considering the mitigating conditions, I find that given the information in this
record, Applicant has mitigated the alcohol concern. His last  DUI was in 2005. In 2005,
he attended court-ordered treatment, which he successfully completed. The program
counselor did not diagnose alcohol abuse or dependence. Granted, he had an incident
with an open container in 2007, but he again modified his drinking habits. He has not
had any problems since 2007. He has been abstinent since January 2012.
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he had delinquent debts. He did not pay his taxes
(federal or state), and incurred tax liens and failed to pay several bills. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts),  and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant suffered a traumatic event in 2002. This led to depression and use of
alcohol, which impacted his ability to maintain his employment. After losing his job in
2004, he sought medical help. He was not able to find full-time employment until 2008.
However, that did not last. He had more unemployment in 2009, 2011, and part of 2012.
He could not pay his federal or state taxes. He sold his home and lived with his mother.
He has made continuous efforts to pay his bills. He took the needed steps to arrange a
payment schedule with both the IRS and the State. He has paid small accounts.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies in part.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. As noted, Applicant’s 2002 trauma led to a severe depression. He was
physically injured. He lost his well-paying job in 2004. He had difficulty finding
employment. He has lived frugally and has attempted to save money to pay his bills. He
is in repayment status with his taxes. He has paid other accounts. He has another
account in repayment status. He is current with his daily expenses. There is  evidence
11
that he acted reasonably under the circumstances. He has submitted documentation to
show that he has resolved or is resolving his delinquent debts.  He receives  credit
under this mitigating condition.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant has provided evidence of
consistent payment plans. His failure to provide information about financial counseling
obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control).
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
12
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 16(c), a disqualifying conditions exists when there is
“Credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not sufficient for an
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information.” 
Applicant credibly testified that he did not leave his temporary job under
unfavorable conditions. He admitted and disclosed that he was fired from his
employment in 2004 due to his depression. He sought counseling and help due to the
trauma he suffered in 2002. He also produced documentation that he was not arrested
in 2006. 
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude that
AG 17(c) applies due to passage of time. I find that 17(d) applies as Applicant has taken
steps to alleviate and change his behavior and that this is unlikely to recur. The
information was unsubstantiated concerning the unfavorable circumstances with the
temporary agency. Thus, AG 17(f) applies. I have no doubts about his good judgment
and reliability. He has  provided information in this record to show that he has met his
burden of proof to mitigate the personal conduct concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of
persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 34 years old. He has many letters of recommendation from his employers
13
and colleagues. He has struggled since the trauma in 2002 relating to his mother. He
was shot trying to aid his mother. This event appears to be the cause of Applicant’s
financial, personal, alcohol, and drug problems. Prior to that incident, Applicant was
gainfully employed, owned a house, and had no legal problems. 
Applicant suffered for years after the 2002 incident. He was shot and
hospitalized. He feared for his mother’s safety. He became enraged and depressed. He
had thoughts of suicide. He continued in his job until 2004, when his depression
prohibited him from working. He was fired. At that time, he was earning approximately
$60,000 a year.  He owned his home and paid his bills.
When Applicant lost his job in 2004, he could not find steady employment for
several years. He turned to alcohol to manage his depression. He was arrested in 2003
and 2005 for a DUI. He admits that he was drinking to intoxication. He attended a court-
ordered treatment center in 2005. He completed the program, but continued to drink,
which was permissible particularly since he was not diagnosed with either alcohol abuse
or dependency. He had a final alcohol incident in 2007, when an open container was
found in his car. Applicant has modified his drinking and in 2012, he decided to stop. He
has recognized the problem that alcohol can cause. He learned coping skills and has a
support network. 
Financial issues began after the 2004 loss of employment. Applicant could not
pay his taxes. He could not maintain his bills. He sold his home in 2005 and tried to start
a business. He was not successful. He continued to search for employment, taking part-
time and temporary jobs when he could. He lived with his mother. He did not live in an
extravagant manner. He arranged a payment plan with both the federal and state tax
agencies. He is in repayment status with both. He has paid several debts, even prior to
the SOR. He has one account in repayment status. He has other accounts that are paid
as agreed. Applicant has persevered and has been courageous in his attempt to better
himself and lead a productive life. He took classes in 2008 and in 2010 to gain more
certifications to improve his chances of employment. He has been offered a permanent
position contingent on his obtaining a security clearance.
Applicant disclosed his issues in his SF-86 and his DOHA interrogatories.
Granted, he did make mistakes with some dates, but he was not trying to hide any of his
past behavior. He admitted that he used marijuana from 1999 until about 2003. He has
no intention of using any illegal drug in the future. He believes he has broken the cycle.
He has been employed and has submitted to drug tests. He has made great strides in
the past years despite the severe trauma he experienced as a young man. He
presented himself in an organized, coherent fashion at the hearing. He presented his
documentation and followed up on post-hearing submissions. He is a productive citizen
who wants to continue his work. 
Applicant has been free of any issues with alcohol, drug or criminal charges
since 2007. He submitted sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised in
his case. He provided documentation regarding a consistent payment plan for all his
14
debts. I have no doubts about his trustworthiness or judgment given the record.
Accordingly, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.  Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1g: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a -2.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a -3.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 4.a:-c: For Applicant
 Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
