 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-06506 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nancy A. Thoma, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
concerns. After graduating from college, he was unable to find a job and fell behind on 
his student loans and credit cards that he had amassed while going to school. He has 
brought his student loans current, paid his credit cards, and put his financial house in 
order. He did not falsify his security clearance application when he omitted his 
delinquent debts. Clearance is granted.  
 
Procedural History 
 
On May 4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 On May 30, 2012, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 20, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on June 29, 2012 and, after 
coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for July 25, 2012. At hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing with counsel, testified, and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A - I.2 The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 2, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early thirties. He went to an in-state college from 2000 to 2005. 
He worked while going to college, but still had to take out about $15,000 in student 
loans to pay for his education. He also amassed credit card debt to pay for living 
expenses while going to school. He left school in 2005 and moved back home with his 
mother with the expectation that he would be able to secure a well-paying job in the 
near term. He was unemployed for approximately six months and was only able to find 
work as a bartender, which did not pay enough to cover his monthly expenses and the 
debt he had accumulated while going to school. Applicant admits that after leaving 
college he did not know how much debt he had amassed, nor did he have a plan to pay 
the debts. He defaulted on his student loans and a number of other financial obligations, 
including his credit cards. (Tr. at 17-18, 39-40, 49-50; GE 1; AE G – H) 
 
Applicant was able to secure a job with his current employer, his first professional 
job, in March 2009. He married his wife the following year and they have a child. When 
they started house hunting, Applicant became aware of his delinquent debts and 
contacted his creditors. He was able to settle and pay eight debts totaling approximately 
$4,500 prior to the issuance of the SOR. He also consolidated his student loans and 
brought them current. In order to save money and repair his credit, Applicant and his 
young family moved in with his in-laws. Applicant was then able to satisfy the remaining 
debts listed on the SOR, including the credit card debt from college. (Tr. at 17-29, 31-
33, 38-40, 42; GE 2; AE A – I; HE III)  
 
 Applicant testified regarding the significant and lasting impact recovering from his 
financial trouble has had on him. He and his family live within a budget. He does not 
have any credit cards, and the only consumer debt that he and his wife have is a used 
car that has a modest monthly car payment. He has saved over $12,000 in a dedicated 
savings account and has about $3,000 saved in an employer-sponsored retirement 
account. He has not amassed any other debt. (Tr. at 29-30, 40-41; GE 2) 
  
 Applicant requires a security clearance for his job. On June 9, 2010, he filled out 
and submitted a security clearance application (SCA). This was Applicant’s first 
application for a security clearance. He disclosed derogatory information on his SCA, 
including an alcohol-related arrest and marijuana use. (GE 1 at 49-51) However, when 
Applicant attempted to answer the questions regarding his finances, he was unable to 
because the online version of the SCA that he was filling out required him to input 
specific information about his delinquent debts and he did not have the information. He 
                                                          
2
 See Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II for a listing of the parties’ exhibits. 
 
3 
 
 
did not know how to get a credit report in order to get the needed information and was 
too embarrassed to ask his parents for assistance. He also could not mark “yes” to the 
pertinent questions regarding his finances and type in that he had some delinquent 
debts in general, because the online version would not allow him to complete the 
application without specific information about his debts. Applicant knew he would he be 
interviewed after submitting his SCA, and decided at that moment to mark “no” to the 
questions about his finances and to bring the negative information about his debts to the 
interviewer’s attention. A month later, Applicant appeared for his background interview. 
He voluntarily disclosed that he had financial issues and, with the assistance of the 
investigator who was able to access Applicant’s credit report, was able to discuss each 
of his delinquent debts in detail. He later voluntarily provided information about his 
finances and other issues in response to DOHA interrogatories. (Tr. at 18, 33-36, 45-49; 
GE 2; GE 3; Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”3 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of college-related debt. A situation 
that is neither uncommon, nor sufficient on its own to raise a concern. However, after 
leaving college in 2005, Applicant defaulted on his student loans and became 
delinquent on his other debts. He did not address his debts for several years thereafter. 
It is this history of financial irresponsibility that raises the financial considerations 
concern and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis under Guideline F, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
                                                          
3
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 26, 2012) (The Guideline F concern “is broader than a concern that an applicant might 
commit criminal acts in order to pay off his debts. Rather, Guideline F requires a judge to consider the 
totality of an applicant’s circumstances–the reasons underlying his financial problems and his efforts to 
address them–in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the applicant possesses the judgment and 
self-control required of those who have access to national security information.”) 
 
 
5 
 
 
evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”4 Accordingly, 
Applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more 
of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is, in part, due to matters beyond his control, 
namely, a long period of unemployment and underemployment. However, AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not fully applicable because Applicant did not address his debts in a responsible fashion 
until relatively recently.  
 
 On the other hand, AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), and (d) fully apply. Applicant initiated a 
good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts before the SOR was issued. He fully 
resolved several of his debts, including his student loans, before the SOR was issued. 
He has satisfied the remaining debts listed in the SOR and has not amassed any other 
debt. It was clear by his demeanor while he testified that this experience has had a 
significant impact on Applicant. His actions over the past three plus years has been 
consistent with his testimony. He has slashed his living expenses by moving in with his 
in-laws, and used the savings to pay his outstanding debt and save a substantial sum. 
In short, Applicant has put his financial house in order and his past history of financial 
trouble no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or 
her SCA. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.5 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose his delinquent debts on his SCA. He 
genuinely did not know the specifics regarding his debts at the time he submitted his 
SCA. He thought that by bringing the information about his finances to the investigator’s 
attention during the ensuing background interview he would satisfy his obligation to 
reveal this potentially adverse information. His testimony is fully consistent with the 
evidence. He voluntarily disclosed other adverse information about his past on the SCA 
that was far more derogatory. More importantly, prior to being confronted with the 
adverse information about his finances, Applicant voluntarily revealed to the agent that 
he had delinquent debts, but did not know the specifics of his debts due to his financial 
irresponsibility.6 He then fully cooperated with the background interview and the 
processing of his security clearance application, including voluntarily answering 
interrogatories posed to him by DOHA. This level of complete openness and full 
cooperation is wholly consistent with what is expected of those granted a clearance.  
 
 Furthermore, this was Applicant’s first application for a security clearance. He 
was far from the sophisticated applicant who would be familiar with the questions on the 
SCA, the security clearance process in general, and steps one can take when 
confronted with ambiguous questions or other issues with the SCA. Moreover, I had an 
opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor as he was questioned by counsel and I 
                                                          
5
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
6
 AG ¶ 17(a): “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” 
 
 
7 
 
 
thoroughly questioned him myself. I found him credible.7 Applicant mitigated the 
concerns raised by the omission of his delinquent debts from his SCA. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I incorporate my above analysis herein and note some 
additional whole-person factors. Applicant’s financial trouble began when he was a 
young man. He could not find a job that paid him enough to satisfy the debts he had 
amassed while going to college. He worked as a bartender for several years until 
securing his current job. He has matured greatly over the past few years, as evidenced 
by his responsible decision to move in with his in-law, which may not result in immediate 
personal satisfaction but will secure his and his young family’s financial future. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:          For Applicant 
 
                                                          
7
 An administrative judge is not required to accept an applicant’s bare assertions, especially when 
such assertions are contradicted by the record evidence, or are implausible, or are internally inconsistent 
with other statements made by an applicant. Applicant’s statements that he lacked knowledge about his 
debts and the difficulty he encountered with the SCA were initially met with skepticism. However, such 
skepticism is not a substitute for substantial evidence. More importantly, Applicant met his heavy burden 
in demonstrating that he did not deliberately falsify his SCA. Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 09-00266 
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2012) (judge’s finding that applicant deliberately falsified his SCA when he omitted 
adverse employment information was supported by circumstantial evidence of applicant’s state of mind). 
 
8
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
