 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-05446 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 24, 2010, seeking to 
continue a clearance she received in July 2007. On April 13, 2012, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified her that it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her access to classified 
information, and it recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether to grant or deny her application. DOHA set forth the basis 
for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing security concerns under Guideline 
F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 20, 2012; answered it on May 18, 2012; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
21, 2012. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 13, 2012, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 19, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 25, 
2012, scheduling it for July 24, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until August 20, 2012, to enable Applicant to 
submit additional documentary evidence. She timely submitted AX D through H, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX D 
through H are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on August 1, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.h-1.m. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old security officer employed by a federal contractor since 
August 2006. She received an associate’s degree in criminal justice in April 2006, and 
she has worked in the security field since April 2004. She had two periods of 
unemployment, from December 2003 to April 2004 and May 2006 to August 2006.  
 
 Applicant and her then boyfriend bought a home in 2004. They paid about 
$160,000. Her boyfriend made a $5,000 down payment and they obtained an 
adjustable-rate mortgage for the remainder of the purchase price. In 2006, they 
refinanced the loan and withdrew about $40,000 in equity to make repairs and 
improvements on the house. The balance on the refinanced loan was about $199,000, 
with monthly payments of $837. In February 2007, Applicant’s boyfriend moved out of 
the house, stopped contributing to the payments, and refused to communicate with her. 
(Tr. 38-41.)  
 
Applicant was unable to make the house payments on her income alone. She 
contacted the lender and negotiated a loan modification, but her ex-boyfriend refused to 
sign the documents. Applicant hired an attorney, who contacted her ex-boyfriend’s 
attorney and asked for his assistance in completing the loan modification. Applicant also 
offered, through her attorney, to purchase her ex-boyfriend’s interest in the home for 
$20,000. (GX 4 at 10; AX A-C.) Her ex-boyfriend has not responded to her request or 
purchase offer.  
 
Applicant listed her home for sale and obtained the lender’s approval for a short 
sale. She received an offer to purchase the home for $70,000, but her ex-boyfriend has 
not responded to requests to cooperate with the short sale. Applicant still lives in the 
home, but she has not made any mortgage payments for a year and a half. She was 
informed by the creditor that any payments she made would be held in escrow. Instead 
 
3 
 
 
of paying $837 into an escrow account, she has been using the money to pay off other 
debts. (Tr. 43-48.) The delinquent home mortgage is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. As a result 
of being financially overextended because of the home mortgage, Applicant fell behind 
on other financial obligations, which are alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e-1.m.  
 
Applicant settled the $846 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $600. She 
made the $600 payment on August 16, 2012. (Tr. 34-35; AX E.) She paid the $165 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in February 2012. (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 2.) 
 
 Applicant has been unable to resolve the $4,402 credit card debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.c. She testified that she contacted the creditor three times during March and April of 
2011, but the creditor insists on payment in full, which she cannot afford. (Tr. 32, 37-38.) 
She testified that she did not recognize the $185 debt to the same creditor, alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. (Tr. 48-49.) The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e does not appear on her most 
recent credit report. (GX 2.)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she had settled the $1,076 cell phone debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g for $505. On July 3, 2012, she received a payment reminder for 
the $505 payment. On July 19, 2012, she sent a check for $505. After the hearing, her 
check was returned, with a letter stating that the collection agency was no longer 
servicing the account. She contacted the original creditor, who informed her that the 
collection agency still was servicing the account. (Tr. 51; AX D; AX G.) 
 
In May 2012, Applicant negotiated a payment agreement on the $6,337 credit 
card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. Pursuant to the agreement, $227 is automatically paid 
from her checking account each month. (Tr. 49-50; AX F.) She has consolidated the 
delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.l and her payments are current. (Tr. 
53-54; Answer to SOR, Enclosure 3; AX H.) The $990 cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.m was paid in March 2012. (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 1.) 
 
 Applicant married in April 2011. Her husband is a truck driver who works outside 
the United States. (Tr. 33-34.) They live apart and she visits him twice a year. (Tr. 58.) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is about $2,400. She did not list her 
husband’s monthly take-home pay on the personal financial statement (PFS) that she 
submitted to DOHA in March 2012. Her monthly expenses no longer include the $837 
mortgage payment. Her current monthly expenses are about $1,600, leaving a net 
remainder of about $800 that is available to resolve her delinquent debts. Her husband 
and she each pay their own household expenses, because they are living apart. (GX 4 
at 8; Tr. 55-58.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
4 
 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an appellant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Appellant’s credit reports, admissions in response to the SOR, responses to 
DOHA interrogatories, and testimony at the hearing establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 Security concerns based on financial considerations may be mitigated by any of 
the following conditions in AG ¶ 20. The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; or  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are ongoing and numerous, but she is not likely to take on 
another financial obligation under the circumstances in which she purchased and 
refinanced her home. The break-up of her relationship with the co-owner of her home, 
her income reduction as a result of the break-up, and her former partner’s lack of 
cooperation were conditions beyond her control. She has acted responsibly by staying 
in contact with her creditors, paying off some of her debts, arranging payment 
agreements, and complying with the payment agreements. She obtained legal advice, 
but she has not sought or received financial counseling. She did not dispute the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e, even though she was been unable to identify it. However, it no longer is 
reported on her credit report. She negotiated a settlement of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.g and tendered the agreed amount, but her payment was mistakenly returned by the 
collection agency. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) are established. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(e) are not established. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has 
systematically addressed her delinquent debts and taken significant actions to resolve 
them. She has acted reasonably and made good-faith efforts to resolve the credit card 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and the delinquent home mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but 
she has been stonewalled in both instances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
7 
 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. She has worked for 
her current employer for six years and held a security clearance for more than five 
years. She recognizes that she exercised bad judgment when she and her boyfriend 
assumed a heavy debt obligation on their home. She appears to have learned a 
valuable lesson. She has been stymied in her good-faith efforts to resolve her 
delinquent home mortgage, but it eventually will be resolved by foreclosure, a loan 
modification, or some other legal means. In the meantime, rather than paying $837 per 
month into an escrow account, she has used her available funds to resolve other 
delinquent debts. The creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c has refused to negotiate, but I am 
confident that she will resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c when she has accumulated 
sufficient funds to have some negotiating leverage. She has adopted a systematic, 
determined, and reasonable approach to her financial problems, leaving me with no 
doubts about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.m:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
