 
 
 
 
1 
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case No. 11-05440 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: James Norman, Esquire, Chief Department Counsel1 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence 
(ASDC3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide 
trustworthiness determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive 
Information Systems Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in the Department of Defense 
(DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation).  
 
                                            
1
Mr. James Norman assumed representation for the Department after Mr. Paul Delaney passed 
away in early July 2012.   
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On April 13, 2010, Applicant completed a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P). On November 17, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 30, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On April 26, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing setting the case for May 16, 2012. On May 12, 2012, DOHA re-assigned the 
case to me due to a medical emergency experienced by the previously assigned 
administrative judge. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. She offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B into evidence without objection. 
The record remained open until June 15, 2012, to give Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional evidence. She timely submitted additional exhibits; however, I did not 
receive those exhibits until July 18, 2012, due to unforeseen circumstances that were 
not the fault of either party. I marked those documents AE C through E and admitted 
them into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
May 23, 2012.                                                          
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 27 allegations contained in the 
SOR.  
 
 Applicant is 28 years old and engaged. She has four children, ages 11, 10, 7, 
and 4. Applicant’s fiancé is the father of her youngest child. She was not married to any 
of the fathers of her other three children. None of those fathers provides child support, 
in spite of court orders. (Tr. 12.) Applicant received a GED in 2008 and has taken 
college courses in criminal justice. In May 2010 she obtained a part-time position with 
her current employer. In September 2011 she became a full-time employee. (Tr. 13, 
37.) She received an “Achieves Expectations” rating for her first review period as a full-
time employee. (AE A.) 
  
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties and delinquent debts to three factors: 
financial immaturity when she was 17 years old and gave birth to her first child; periods 
of unemployment, underemployment, and living on public aid; and being a single mother 
for four children without child support. These circumstances existed from approximately 
2000 to September 2011, when she obtained her current full-time position. (Tr. 13-14, 
39-43; GE 1.)          
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 In October 2010 Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss her 
delinquent debts. In response to questions about the status of many unpaid debts, 
Applicant stated that in the past she had to make choices to take care of her children or 
pay her bills. She chose to provide for her children. She intended to resolve her debts in 
the future. She regretted the financial situation. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a current budget. She earns $2,176 per month. She and her 
fiancé have a combined monthly net income of $3,747. Their monthly expenses are 
$3,207, leaving about $540 for other expenses or debts. (Ex. C.) She had about $600 in 
a savings account. (Tr. 35.) She previously completed a budget in August 2011 that she 
submitted with a set of Interrogatories. At that time her net monthly income was $900. 
(Tr. 23; GE 2.) Prior to filling out that budget form, she had never attempted to establish 
a budget. (Tr. 38.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that she ignored communications from her creditors over the 
years. (Tr. 17.) She did not make any attempt to contact them because she never had 
sufficient money to pay the debts. (Tr. 19.) After she began working full-time, she 
contacted four creditors. Two creditors could not locate her accounts. Two creditors said 
they would send her information about the debts, but did not. She did not follow-up with 
those two. (Tr. 30-34.) She has not participated in credit or financial counseling. (Tr. 14.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated August 2011, and April 2010, the 
SOR alleged that Applicant has 27 delinquent debts that total $14,385. Those debts 
include utility bills, credit cards, two judgments, overdrafts, and ticket fees owed to the 
county clerk. She has not paid or resolved any of the debts. Her student loans, totaling 
$9,000, are deferred. (Tr. 20-21.)  
  
 Applicant testified candidly about her circumstances. For the past three years 
she has been able to pay, with her fiancé’s assistance, her ongoing bills. Until she 
became a full-time employee, she did not have enough money to address her debts. 
(Tr. 43.) Although she has knowledge of her debts, she does not have a solid grasp of 
her finances, salary, or totality of the delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
 
 
 
4 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns for financial considerations are set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying under the facts of this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
Applicant started accumulating delinquent debt in 2000 with the birth of her first 
child, when she was 17. She had insufficient money to pay her debts until September 
2011 when she obtained a full-time position. She offered no evidence that she paid or 
otherwise resolved any of her delinquent debts since then. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a 
history of unpaid debt:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant’s debts started accumulating in 2000 and they remain unpaid or 
unresolved. Because the debts are numerous and on-going, there is insufficient 
evidence to trigger mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant attributes her financial 
problems to being a single mother of four children, experiencing periods of 
unemployment or underemployment, and financial immaturity. While some of those 
circumstances may have been unforeseeable and beyond her control, she did not 
demonstrate that she took steps to responsibly address the problems as they were 
arising. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.   
Applicant has not participated in financial counseling and only recently began 
establishing a budget. Because none of the debts have been addressed, there are no 
indications that her problems are coming under control, sufficient to warrant application 
of AG ¶ 20(c). Nor is there evidence to demonstrate that she made a good-faith effort to 
pay or resolve any of the 27 debts, which is necessary for the application of AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 28-year-old 
woman, who has had a difficult life as a young mother supporting four children without 
monetary assistance from her children’s fathers. Since September 2011, she has been 
exhibiting success working for a federal contractor in a full-time position. Until obtaining 
this position, she had never worked at a steady good-paying position. Applicant’s 
conduct of concern involves delinquent debts incurred since 2000 and totaling $14,385. 
Applicant accepts responsibility for the debts. She stated both during an October 2010 
interview and at the hearing that she would like to pay them. However, she did not 
present evidence that she paid or resolved even some of the smaller debts of $113, 
 
 
 
 
7 
$110, $37, $22, or $9, despite having knowledge of the Government’s concerns for 
more than 18 months.  
 
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial considerations, including her failure to 
pay any of the delinquent financial obligations that she accumulated since 2000. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and 
suitability for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
             _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
