 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-07807 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct concern. He used marijuana on 
two separate occasions in the past four years while possessing a security clearance. He 
failed to demonstrate that he will not engage in similar questionable conduct in the 
future. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On May 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct).1 On May 30, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On June 27, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on July 2, 2012 and, after coordinating 
with the parties, scheduled the hearing for July 26, 2012. At hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 3, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted a character reference from his employer, 
which was admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. He subsequently submitted AE B – D, 
which were also admitted.2 The transcript was received on August 2, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is an avid cyclist and runner, and involved in a 
number of charitable endeavors. He has been married for 17 years and has lived at the 
same address for nearly a decade. He was granted a bachelor’s degree from a 
prestigious university in 1997. He has been working as an independent contractor for 
his current employer since December 2001. Applicant’s employer describes him as 
“resourceful, reliable, and trustworthy.” (Tr. at 19-20, 23-25, 28; GE 1; AE A - D) 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy in the mid-1980s. He deployed on several 
occasions in support of U.S. operations, and was granted access to classified 
information in approximately 1985. This initial period of access to classified information 
terminated upon Applicant’s honorable discharge from the Navy in about 1988. (Tr. at 
24-27, 34-35; GE 2; AE C)  
 
Applicant reapplied for a security clearance in 2005. He submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA) and disclosed therein that he had used marijuana once in 
2003. He explained that he and his wife shared a marijuana cigarette that had been left 
at their home by a guest after a birthday party. Applicant testified that during the 
subsequent background investigation he may have promised to not use illegal drugs in 
the future. He was then granted a clearance in 2006. (Tr. at 21-22, 27-30, 33-35; GE 2)  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2011. He disclosed that he had again 
used marijuana. His recent uses occurred in 2008 and 2010. (GE 1) Applicant explained 
that his 2008 use took place while on vacation, when an older couple he had never met 
before offered him a marijuana cigarette. He “felt silly or embarrassed saying no,” and 
shared the marijuana cigarette with the older couple in the back seat of their car. 
(Answer; Tr. at 20, 30) His 2010 use took place at home, on a weekend evening, when 
he had no plans to go anywhere. He was listening to classic rock and decided to use a 
marijuana cigarette that had been left at his home by a “friend of a friend,” because “that 
just seemed like the thing to do.”3 (Tr. at 21-22, 31-32; Answer)  
 
Applicant understood when he used marijuana in 2008 and 2010 that such use 
was inconsistent with the standards expected of those possessing a security clearance. 
(Tr. at 33) His decision to use marijuana on these occasions “were lapses in judgment 
                                                          
2
 See Hearing Exhibits 1 and 2 for a listing of the parties’ exhibits. 
 
3
 Applicant “was listening to Pink Floyd’s ‘Dark Side of the Moon’.” (Tr. at 22) 
 
3 
 
 
or not thinking things through all the way.” (Tr. at 19) Applicant is clearly remorseful for 
his conduct and has “no intentions to do anything like this in the future.” (Answer; Tr. at 
19, 22, 35)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is set forth in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana after being granted a security clearance raises this 
concern because it calls into question his judgment and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.4 It also establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(c).5 
 
 Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the personal conduct concern. 
Although the adverse information regarding his drug use was voluntarily disclosed, such 
candor is insufficient to mitigate the significant security concerns raised by his poor 
judgment to use marijuana while possessing a security clearance. Applicant’s drug use 
did not take place under a unique set of circumstances, nor is he a young individual 
whose conduct could be attributed to mere experimentation. For instance, the 2008 
drug use occurred when Applicant, who was 42 years old at the time, was on vacation 
and a stranger offered him marijuana. An individual, with Applicant’s background, is 
expected under such circumstances to at a minimum decline the opportunity offered by 
a stranger to engage in illegal conduct. Furthermore, one would not expect an individual 
in Applicant’s shoes to engage in illicit drug use simply because they are at home alone. 
Under the circumstances, Applicant’s illicit drug use, although infrequent, leaves me to 
conclude that similar questionable conduct may recur. Applicant’s past conduct leaves 
me to question whether he has the requisite reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment required of those granted access to classified information.6 
                                                          
4
 Although Applicant’s recent use of marijuana while possessing a security clearance is the 
conduct that raises a heightened concern, his 2003 use of marijuana also calls into question his 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. By itself, the 2003 use may have been mitigated by the 
passage of time. However, Applicant’s 2003 use of marijuana, together with his recent uses, calls into 
question his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
5
 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports 
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not safeguard protected information. 
 
6
 I considered all the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17, but Applicant failed to establish 
the applicability of any of the conditions listed thereunder. I specifically found that AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply. See AG ¶17(c): “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s military service and years of 
safeguarding classified information. However, this favorable evidence, as well as the 
other mitigating record evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue.8 
Security clearance adjudications are by their very nature predictive judgments, where 
an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct. Applicant’s past 
conduct leaves me with doubts as to his judgment and suitability. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Accordingly, Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
7
 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) 
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8
 ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (“[e]ven years of safeguarding national 
security information may not be sufficient to mitigate” security concern raised by an applicant’s conduct); 
ISCR Case No. 10-02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012) (“Applicant’s documented service to the country 
was record evidence which the Judge had to consider,” but on its own may not be sufficient to overcome 
concerns raised about an applicant’s judgment and reliability). 
