 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03904  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 4, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 10, 2012, scheduling the hearing for August 7, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 were 
 
2 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 15, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. military from 1989 until he was honorably discharged in 2003. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since 1989. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married with three children, 
ages 25, 23, and 21.1 
  
 Applicant’s finances were unremarkable before his wife’s retail business failed in 
about 2007. She was the manager of a store for several years. In about 2004, Applicant 
and his wife bought the business, and it operated profitably for several years. Applicant 
worked long hours on his job on the military base and was uninvolved in the business 
other than assisting in its purchase. The real estate collapse and recession hit 
Applicant’s state particularly hard. The store lost customers. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debts while attempting to keep the store open. They closed the store in late 
2007 or early 2008.2  
 
 Applicant has been attempting to resolve the financial problems created by the 
failed business for several years. He paid or settled multiple debts before the SOR was 
issued.3 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts with balances ranging from $65 to 
$15,762. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $14,480 debt to a credit union. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a 
$15,762 debt to a collection company on behalf of the same credit union. These two 
allegations are duplicate listings of the same underlying debt. Individual debts are 
discussed further below.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent debt of $6,361 to a collection company on behalf 
of a bank. Applicant settled the debt for $3,000 in July 2012. He paid the $65 delinquent 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e in June 2012.4 
 
 Applicant has never received financial counseling, but his finances are currently 
in better shape. His wife is working and Applicant earns a good salary. His daughter 
moved back home with her two children for a period. He helped them financially before 
they moved out about six months ago. His son also moved back home. Applicant 
credibly testified that he intends to pay or settle the two remaining delinquent debts 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 42-43; GE 1, 9. 
 
2 Tr. at 18, 23-25, 35; GE 2, 3, 9. 
 
3 Tr. at 26, 35-36, 52-53; GE 4, 7-10. 
 
4 Tr. at 28-30, 33-35, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5, 7, 10; AE B, C. 
 
3 
 
totaling about $21,000 for the deficiencies owed on his repossessed pickup truck and 
motorcycle. He has been in contact with the creditors for those accounts. One of the 
creditors was unable to locate his account. Applicant is current on his other accounts.5   
 
Applicant received numerous awards and decorations while serving in the 
military, and he deployed in support of Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. He 
volunteers in his community. A witness testified and Applicant submitted a number of 
documents and letters attesting to his character and excellent job performance. He is 
praised as a hard-working family man who displays integrity, reliability, trustworthiness, 
loyalty, and honesty.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 27, 30-32, 36-41; GE 4, 5, 7, 10; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 15-20; GE 6; AE D. 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
  Applicant’s finances were unremarkable before his wife’s retail business failed in 
about 2007. That business failure qualifies as a condition beyond his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
  Applicant has been actively working to resolve his financial problems since 2007. 
He paid or settled multiple debts before the SOR was issued, and he settled two of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. He credibly testified that he will pay or settle the remaining 
two debts. He has not received financial counseling, but his finances are back on track.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I found Applicant to be honest 
and candid about his finances. I believe he is sincere about resolving his remaining 
financial issues. As indicated above, an applicant is not required to establish that he has 
paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant establish a 
plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
I find that Applicant has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and has 
taken significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
