 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-03633 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing version of a Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on October 18, 2011.2 On February 1, 2012, DOHA issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (e-QIP), dated October 4, 2010. 
 
2
 Item 8 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated October 18, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 14, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated March 2, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on 
June 15, 2012, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after 
receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on June 25, 2012, and timely submitted 
additional documents to which Department Counsel had no objections. The case was 
assigned to me on July 31, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e. of the SOR). Those 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a non-destructive testing (NDT) inspector. A 1989 high school graduate, he attended a 
community college part-time for one year, but did not earn a degree. Despite working 
40-60 hours per week, he is a “full-time” student at a college where he is on the honor 
roll seeking an associate’s degree in applied science. He served on active duty in an 
enlisted capacity with the U.S. Navy from 1989 until 1993, when he was discharged with 
an honorable discharge certificate. While serving on active duty, Applicant was awarded 
the Navy Achievement Medal, and was presented with a letter of commendation and a 
letter of appreciation. Applicant was previously employed in various positions by a 
variety of employers. He was a sales manager with an insurance company from 1999 
until 2008;4 and a chipper operator with a wood chip mill from 2008 until 2009. He joined 
his present employer in 2009. Applicant’s employment history between 1993 and 1999 
has not been described, except for his comment that he was laid off in 2000.5 Applicant 
was married to his first wife in 1992, and divorced in 1998. They have two daughters, 
born in 1992 and 1997. He married his current wife in 2001. They have one daughter, 
                                                          
3
 The matter was initially misclassified as a request for a hearing, but soon after being assigned to another 
administrative judge to schedule the hearing, the error was caught and, after being given an option by that 
administrative judge, Applicant reaffirmed his desire to have the case decided on the written record. See, Item 4 
(Memorandum, dated June 13, 2012). 
  
4
 While with the insurance company, Applicant received recognition on several occasions as agent of the 
month, agent of the year, and leading associate manager of the year. 
 
5
 Applicant’s comment pertaining to the date of his layoff has to be in error, because he also indicated he did 
not join the insurance company until 1999, as a result of his earlier layoff. See, Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the 
SOR, dated March 2, 2012), at 1. 
 
3 
                                      
 
born in 2002, and one son, born in 2007. In 1989, Applicant was granted a secret 
security clearance.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2005 when the 
first accounts became delinquent for various periods. Accounts also became delinquent 
in 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2010. Applicant denied having spending problems, and 
attributed his financial problems to several factors: the old farm house that he 
purchased without a home inspection was in worse condition than he expected, 
requiring extensive repairs; his 1998 divorce from his first wife and the necessity of 
paying her the equitable share of the equity in their home; refinancing the home 
mortgage to do so, resulting in higher monthly payments; being laid off in 1999 or 2000; 
obtaining a low-wage position with a wood chip company; and working for 100 per cent 
commissions with an insurance company when success was periodic and commissions, 
irregular. As a result of a combination of those factors, accounts became delinquent and 
were placed for collection or charged off. One account went into foreclosure. 
 
 When interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in November 2010, Applicant was unaware of certain accounts 
about which he was questioned. He stated his intention to find out more about each 
such account and, if it was due, to make arrangements to resolve the account. 
 
 The SOR identified five purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling 
approximately $168,476, of which $162,000 was the unpaid loan balance on his home 
mortgage. Each account is described below, reflecting both the original and present 
status, as follows: 
 
 (SOR & 1.a.): This is a medical account with an unidentified medical provider 
with an unpaid balance of $302 that was placed for collection in March 2008. 
 
 (SOR & 1.d.): This is another medical account with an unidentified medical 
provider with an unpaid balance of $370 that was placed for collection with 
the same collection agent in March 2008.  
 
 (SOR & 1.b.): This is a bank credit card account with a high credit of $3,365 
that was charged off and sold to a collection agent in May 2008. The 
collection agent increased the balance to $4,802.  
 
 (SOR & 1.c.): This is a home mortgage loan with a high credit of $148,750 
that was past due in the amount of $13,046, with an unpaid balance of 
$146,079, as of October 2010. Foreclosure proceedings were initiated, and 
the account was sold to a credit agent who increased the past-due balance to 
$32,655, and the unpaid balance to $162,000.  
 
 (SOR & 1.e.): This is a telephone account with a past-due balance of $1,002 
that was placed for collection in October 2010. While the account is listed in 
 
4 
                                      
 
an October 2010 credit report,6 it no longer appears in his September 2011 
credit report.7 Applicant offered no documentary evidence of any payments 
having been made on any of the above accounts. 
 
 The child support obligation for Applicant’s daughter from his first marriage was 
reduced from $440 per month to $50 per month, as she is now 19 years old; he has 
reduced expenses by discontinuing smoking; cancelling cable television; discontinuing 
extra curriculum sports for the children; rejecting new credit cards; making dietary 
changes; and postponing the purchase of a new automobile. In doing so, Applicant has 
managed to remain current on his remaining accounts. In January 2012 – before the 
issuance of the SOR – he sought professional guidance on how to deal with his 
delinquent debt and engaged the professional services of an attorney to enable him do 
so.8 It was recommended that Applicant seek the protection of bankruptcy.  
 
On February 18, 2012, Applicant obtained credit counseling on line, but no debt 
repayment plan was prepared.9 On March 14, 2012, having satisfied the bankruptcy 
means test, Applicant filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the 
United States Bankruptcy Code.10 In it, he listed $14,673 in assets, and $163,645 in 
liabilities. All the accounts identified in the SOR, along with the creditors, collection 
agents, and debt purchasers connected to those accounts, were listed in the bankruptcy 
petition. On June 27, 2012, Applicant’s unsecured nonpriority claims, including those 
listed in the SOR, were discharged.11 All of the SOR accounts have been resolved. 
 
 In March 2012, Applicant’s gross monthly income was $4,360,12 which, if 
calculated over a period of 12 months, equals an annual salary of approximately 
$52,320. In calendar year 2011, he earned a gross income, including overtime, of 
$59,504.13 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”14 As Commander in Chief, 
                                                          
6
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax credit report, dated October 16, 2010). 
 
7
 Item 7 (Equifax credit report, dated September 21, 2011). 
8
 Letter from attorney, dated February 28, 2012, attached to Item 3, supra note 5. 
 
9
 Certificate of Counseling, dated February 18, 2012, attached to Item 3, supra note 5. 
 
10
 Item 10 (Voluntary Petition, dated March 14, 2012). 
 
11
 Discharge of Debtor, dated June 27, 2012, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
12
 Item 10, Form 22A (Chapter 7 Statement of Current Monthly Income and Means-Test Calculation, dated 
March 14, 2012). 
 
13
 Item 10 (Statement of Financial Affairs, dated March 14, 2012). 
 
14
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”15   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”16 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.17  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
                                                          
15
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
16
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
17
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”18 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”19 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems commenced in about 2005 when some 
accounts became delinquent for various periods, and other accounts followed. Some 
accounts were placed for collection, charged off, or, in one instance, went to 
foreclosure. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
                                                          
18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
19
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@20  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) partially apply. Applicant’s financial problems commenced 
in 2005 when he began falling behind on some of his payments. He attributed his 
financial problems to several factors, some of which were beyond his control, and some 
of which had an indirect impact on his ability to remain current: the old farm house that 
he purchased without a home inspection was in worse condition than he expected, 
requiring extensive repairs; his 1998 divorce from his first wife and the necessity of 
paying her the equitable share of the equity in their home; refinancing the home 
mortgage to do so, resulting in higher monthly payments; being laid off in 1999 or 2000; 
obtaining a low-wage position with a wood chip company; and working for 100 per cent 
commissions with an insurance company when success was periodic and commissions, 
irregular. Applicant’s financial situation began to deteriorate, and although he managed 
to maintain most of his accounts in a current status, over the next few years, he could 
not do so with the remaining accounts. There were only five delinquent accounts 
throughout the years, and all of them have now been discharged in bankruptcy. 
Applicant’s financial problems were thus relatively infrequent, and considering his 
current clean financial slate, they are unlikely to recur. While he was previously unable 
to remain current on all his accounts, he was able to do so with the majority of them. 
Considering his unspecified past positive efforts, the circumstances surrounding his 
past financial problems, and his current clean financial status, there is no doubt cast on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.21  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. Over the years, Applicant managed to maintain 
most of his accounts in a current status. However, some of them, through a variety of 
circumstances, became delinquent. In February 2012, Applicant obtained credit 
counseling on line, but no debt repayment plan was prepared. There is substantial 
                                                          
20
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
21
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
mitigating value in the type of financial counseling he received. In March 2012, having 
satisfied the bankruptcy means test, Applicant filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy 
under Chapter 7. All the accounts identified in the SOR, along with the creditors, 
collection agents, and debt purchasers connected to those accounts, were listed in the 
bankruptcy petition. In June 2012, Applicant’s unsecured nonpriority claims, including 
those listed in the SOR, were discharged. Accordingly, all of the SOR accounts have 
been resolved.22 Circumstances may have been such that Applicant was unable to 
resolve all of his accounts by bringing them up-to-date or resolving them before the 
SOR was issued, but he did do so with most of his non-SOR accounts. His failure with 
respect to his five remaining accounts, all of which have been resolved through 
bankruptcy discharge, was not for lack of trying.23  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
                                                          
22
 There is some duplication of debts in Appellant’s bankruptcy schedules. In a bankruptcy filing, most 
debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been resold or transferred to a different collection agent 
or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of subsequent dismissal of the bankruptcy. If Appellant failed to list 
some debts on his bankruptcy schedules, this failure to list some debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, 
in a no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a 
discharge, even when they are not listed on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 
1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see First Circuit Bucks 
Majority on Discharge of Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 2009). 
There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & 
Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). 
 
23
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He allowed five 
accounts to become delinquent, and they were either placed for collection, charged off, 
sold, or went to foreclosure. He did not resolve those accounts by paying them off, but 
by having them discharged under a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced in 2005, and periodically occurred again 
over the period of several years. As noted above, the financial problems were in varying 
degrees beyond his control, or had an indirect impact on his ability to remain current. 
Applicant managed to maintain most of his accounts in a current status, but over the 
next few years, he could not do so with the remaining accounts. There were only five 
delinquent accounts throughout the years, and all of them have now been discharged in 
bankruptcy.  Now that the remaining five accounts have been discharged, he has been 
given a new lease on his financial situation. Furthermore, his expenses have been 
reduced in varying ways, and his has modified his spending habits. The child support 
obligation for his daughter from his first marriage was reduced from $440 per month to 
$50 per month as she is now 19 years old; he has reduced expenses by discontinuing 
smoking; cancelling cable television; discontinuing extra curriculum sports for the 
children; rejecting new credit cards; making dietary changes; and postponing the 
purchase of a new automobile. In doing so, Applicant has managed to remain current 
on his remaining accounts. In January 2012 – before the issuance of the SOR – he 
sought professional guidance on how to deal with his delinquent debt and engaged the 
professional services of an attorney to enable him do so. He followed the advice that he 
received. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:24 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
                                                          
24
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.25 Applicant has 
demonstrated a meaningful track record of debt reduction and elimination. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
25
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
