 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-05512
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her financial
problems. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 3, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
her job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow
Applicant access to classified information.  On April 4, 2012, DOHA issued to Applicant1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed
at Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing. On June 13, 2012, Department Counsel sent Applicant a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant3
received the FORM on June 25, 2012, and was given 30 days to respond. Applicant
timely submitted a one-page memorandum and two enclosed documents. Applicant’s
response to the FORM was included in the record without objection. The case was
assigned to me on August 8, 2012.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged that Applicant has 15 delinquent or past-due debts
totaling $60,710 (SOR 1.a - 1.o). In response to the SOR (FORM, Item 4), she admitted
all of the allegations. In addition to the facts established by her admissions, I have made
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 50 years old and works for a defense contractor in a position that
requires a security clearance. She has worked for her current employer since March
2000. She most recently received a security clearance in November 2005. (FORM, Item
6)
Applicant was married from October 2003 until her divorce in January 2007. In
response to financial questions in her eQIP, Applicant disclosed she had debts that
were in collection, and that her wages had been garnished to satisfy some of her debts.
She specifically listed the judgment debts alleged at SOR 1.a and 1.b. She also
disclosed that she was having trouble paying her mortgage. (Id.) 
Credit reports obtained during her background investigation documented all of
the debts listed in the SOR. During a subject interview in January 2011, she discussed
the debts listed in her credit history. She was familiar with most of the debts, and she
stated that her financial problems were a result of her divorce in 2007, and that her ex-
husband was not paying his share of the marital debts. She also stated that her co-
habitant boyfriend had lost his job. (FORM, Item 7)
The debt alleged at SOR 1.a was enforced through a civil judgment and
Applicant is paying that debt at $60 each month. (Response to FORM) The debt at SOR
1.b was also enforced through a civil judgment and satisfied through a subsequent
garnishment of Applicant’s pay. (FORM, Item 7; Response to FORM) Applicant is also
making $40 monthly payments for the delinquent credit card debts alleged at SOR 1.e
and 1.f. (FORM, Item 7)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
3
Applicant has not received any financial counseling or other professional
assistance in resolving her debts. A personal financial statement she provided in
response to DOHA interrogatories reflected a negative cash flow each month. The
aforementioned payments to the debts in SOR 1.a, 1.e and 1.f were not listed with her
monthly expenses. (FORM, Item 7) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government presented information that showed Applicant has accrued
delinquent debts in excess of $60,000. She satisfied one debt, albeit through an
involuntary wage garnishment. She is making monthly payments on three other debts,
but the amounts paid will not satisfy those debts in the near future. She did not provide
information showing that any of the remaining debts are being addressed, or that she is
able to pay them. This information raises a security concern about Applicant’s finances
addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG
¶ 19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). By contrast, Applicant’s
information in responses to the Government’s interrogatories, the SOR, and the FORM
do not support any of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20. Her debts are ongoing
and substantial when compared to her income and ability to pay. Although her debts
may have arisen from her divorce, she has not addressed them in a timely or prudent
manner in the five years since her marriage ended. Also, resolution of debts through
wage garnishment does not constitute a good-faith effort to pay one’s debts, and
Applicant has not sought help through debt counseling or other sources. On balance,
she has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial problems.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 50 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. She has a masters degree she received in
2005, and she has been gainfully employed since at least March 2000. However,
available information in support of the AG ¶ 2(a) factors is not sufficient to overcome
reasonable doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information.
5
Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, those
doubts must be resolved for the Government.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
