1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06178 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has five charged-off accounts totaling approximately $100,000, which 
remain unpaid. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) on February 28, 2012, detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
2 
  On April 12, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 21, 2012. The FORM contained eight 
attachments (Items 1–8). On June 10, 2012, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, 
along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s response was 
due on July 10, 2012. No response to the FORM was received. On August 1, 2012, I 
was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the five charged-off accounts 
remain unpaid. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old lead estimator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2008. 
 In February 2011, Applicant was interviewed concerning his delinquent accounts. 
(Item 5) He indicated he, his wife, and two children lived in a home purchased from his 
grandparents’ estate. He owed $348,000 on the first mortgage and $56,000 on the 
second mortgage. In August 2010, on his attorney’s recommendation, Applicant 
stopped making the mortgage payments. (Item 5) He was unable to make the mortgage 
payments because his wife was not working due to surgery following a staph infection. 
Additionally, his wife was caring for their two young children. As of February 2011, his 
attorney was attempting to have the mortgage payments reduced from $2,200 to $1,650 
monthly.   
 During the interview, Applicant stated the amounts of the five charged-off debts 
now listed in the SOR as: $9,153 credit card debt (SOR 1.a), $56,000 second mortgage 
(SOR 1.b), $15,000 bank debt (SOR 1.c), $9,475 credit card debt (SOR 1.d), and 
$10,000 bank debt (SOR 1.e), were correct and unpaid. (Item 5) The five charge-off 
accounts total $99,628. He also stated he had incurred a large amount of medical 
expenses related to the birth of his second child in June 2008. (Item 5)  
 In January 2012, Applicant responded to written interrogatories. At that time, his 
monthly net income (net monthly income of $4,711 less net monthly expenses of $2,263 
and a $1,671 first mortgage payment) was $776. (Item 5) The mortgage lender on his 
first mortgage modified his monthly loan payment, but the lender on the second 
mortgage would not modify the monthly payment amount. In January 2011, he stopped 
paying the second mortgage lender. (Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
4 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has five unpaid charged-off accounts, which together total 
approximately $100,000. The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.”  
 
In February 2011, he was questioned about the five charged-off accounts. Since 
then, he has made no payments on the accounts and they remain unpaid. Applicant 
meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His financial difficulties 
are both recent and multiple, and did not occur under circumstances not likely to recur. 
He asserted he was unable to make his mortgage payments when his wife was 
unemployed following surgery and their decision that she take care of their two young 
children. Additionally, he stated they incurred large medical expenses when their 
second child was born in June 2008. He failed to demonstrate that his debts were 
largely due to circumstances beyond his control, or that he has acted responsibly in 
addressing his debts. Further, there is no evidence of credit counseling, or that his 
financial problems are under control. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
5 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts to explain his 
circumstances, articulate his position, or mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on only a scant paragraph of explanation as to how his inability to repay his 
obligations arose, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
 Based on the totality of the evidence available in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
He has provided no documentation that he has taken effective action to resolve his 
debts. Nor is there evidence he has equipped himself to avoid financial problems in the 
future. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
1 
 
