 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-14540
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tova Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his intentional failure to
file his federal income tax returns for six of the seven tax years between 2003 and 2009.
He also accrued unpaid tax debts because of his failure to file his returns. His request
for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to find that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified
information.  On March 21, 2012, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative
guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F).2
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 24, 2012, and requested a
hearing. I set this matter to be heard on June 20, 2012, and the parties appeared as
scheduled. For reasons more fully discussed below, I continued the hearing until July
11, 2012. DOHA received a transcript (TrA.) of the first hearing on June 27, 2012. The
parties appeared at the second hearing as scheduled. The Government submitted five
exhibits (Gx. 1 - 5), which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and
submitted a single exhibit (Ax. A), which was admitted without objection. DOHA
received a transcript (TrB.) of the second hearing on July 19, 2012.
Procedural Issue
This hearing was held to determine Applicant’s suitability for an industrial security
clearance at the top secret level for his employment with a private contractor doing
business with a government agency. He already has a secret-level clearance, and his
most recent background investigation was initiated because his employer wanted him to
have the higher level of access.
Applicant is also a government employee at a different federal. He is working for
the government contractor as a second job. Applicant was hired as a government
employee five years before he obtained his contractor job, and he initially received his
security clearance through his work for a federal agency. He has been using that
clearance for access in his contractor work.
Applicant appeared pro se at both hearings. As is my practice with all such
applicants, I inquired about his ability to represent himself. In addition to general
questions about his background (age, education, legal training, etc.), I asked if he
understood the issues in his case. I also asked if he understood what the possible
consequences might be if he were to fail in his efforts to obtain a top secret clearance.
From his answers, it became apparent Applicant did not previously understand that, if
he was not found suitable for a top secret clearance for his defense contractor job, his
clearance would be revoked entirely. That also means that he would lose his clearance
for his federal job. Applicant also thought that if his employer withdrew its sponsorship
of his request for the higher clearance, then the adjudication of that request would end
and he would continue working for the contractor (and for the government) with a secret
clearance. (TrA. 4 - 15)
After hearing from both Applicant and Department Counsel, and after considering
all of the circumstances, I decided sua sponte to continue the hearing for three weeks to
give Applicant additional time to seek assistance in preparing his case fully informed of
all the possible ramifications should he be unable to retain his clearance. (TrA. 15 - 20) 
3
I also addressed this issue with the parties at the beginning of the second
hearing. On July 10, 2012, Applicant’s company told Department Counsel that Applicant
no longer needed a top secret security clearance, but still needed a clearance, and that
the company was still sponsoring Applicant for that clearance. Nothing was presented at
either hearing indicating that this matter was not properly before DOHA for hearing and
final adjudication based on the investigation that ensued after his request for a top
secret clearance. (Ax. A; TrB. 7 - 28)
Findings of Fact
In the SOR, the Government alleged that Applicant intentionally did not file his
federal income tax returns as required for tax years 2003 and 2005 - 2009. (SOR 1.a -
1.f). It was also alleged that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a tax lien against
Applicant for taxes owed for tax years 2007 - 2010 (SOR 1.g); and that Applicant owed
the IRS $4,250 for unpaid taxes from 2010 (SOR 1.h). Applicant admitted, with
explanations, all of the SOR allegations except SOR 1.g, which he denied with
explanation.  In addition to Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 44-year-old college graduate with a degree in computer information
systems. He obtained his degree in March 2008, and his transcripts showed his grades
were very good to excellent. Applicant and his wife have been married since November
1993, but they separated in May 2011. They have one child, age 17, whom Applicant
supports along with two stepchildren, ages 22 and 24. Applicant served in the U.S.
Army from October 1989 until May 1997. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 4; TrB. 64 - 66, 83)
Applicant was hired as a federal employee in August 2005, and he submitted a
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (QNSP) in November 2005 to obtain a
secret clearance for his work. His clearance was granted in 2008. (TrB. 86 - 87) In April
2010, Applicant was hired by his contractor employer as an antivirus analyst. He works
at a federal agency during the day and as a contractor in the evening.  (TrB. 57 - 58)
On August 4, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a top secret clearance in connection with his
contractor work. In response to the 16 questions about finances in eQIP Section 26,
Applicant answered “yes” to nine of them and disclosed numerous bad debts, collection
accounts, and wage garnishments. He also disclosed that, as alleged in the SOR, he
had not filed his federal tax returns for 2003 and 2005 - 2009.  He also disclosed in his
eQIP, and in subject interviews in September 2010 and January 2011, that his federal
wages were being garnished at $140 monthly to satisfy past-due taxes totaling about
$8,000 for tax years 2005 - 2009. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3)
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant disclosed that he owed $4,250
for tax year 2010 and that the IRS had a lien against him for tax years 2007 - 2010. (Gx.
4) At his hearing, he testified that he also filed his 2011 return, and that he owes about
$8,000 in taxes for that year. (TrB. 62) For his 2010 and 2011 tax returns, Applicant filed
as “Married, Filing Separately.” He acknowledged that this increases his tax liability and
he now owes another $8,000 for tax year 2011. (TrB. 73 - 74) Applicant also will owe
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
4
unpaid state taxes from 2003 - 2009 because of his failure to file returns in those years.
(TrB. 83)
Applicant averred in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing (TrB. 59) that he
has satisfied the tax lien alleged in SOR 1.g. However, he did not corroborate his claim.
He also stated in his answer that he planned to work with a well-known tax attorney to
resolve his unfiled returns and unpaid taxes. He did not provide any documentation of
that claim, either. Applicant testified that a co-worker at his government job is helping
him with his tax returns and that he expects to have his past-due returns filed soon.
(TrB. 23, 78)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to3
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies4
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept,
those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).6
5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government presented sufficient information to support the SOR allegations
that Applicant deliberately failed to file his federal income tax returns in 2003 and 2005 -
2009, that he owes the IRS at least $4,000 in unpaid taxes, and that the IRS has a lien
against him for tax years 2007 - 2010. Combined with all of the information Applicant
disclosed about his recent financial problems, available information raises the security
concern articulated at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶
19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of
the same).
Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, I have considered the following:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
None of these mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 19 apply. Applicant was interviewed
about his taxes by government investigators as far back as September 2010. He did not
take any action to correct that issue before DOHA issued interrogatories about his taxes
in August 2011. Thereafter, and in the five months between his SOR response and his
hearings, Applicant did not try to resolve his tax problems. He now owes the IRS as
much as $12,000 in unpaid taxes, and he will be billed for unpaid state taxes, as well.
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by this record. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I note that Applicant is a 44-
year-old Army veteran who is working two jobs to resolve other financial problems.
However, this information does not outweigh the security concerns raised by Applicant’s
chronic disregard for his income tax obligations. His intentional failure to file his returns
indicates that he may also decide not to comply with procedures for safeguarding
classified information. His conduct continues to raise doubts about his suitability for
access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, those doubts must be resolved for the government.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
