 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.11-11953 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant an 
undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 21, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
May 24, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled on June 6, 2012. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s 
 
2 
 
Exhibit (AE) A that was admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left 
open until June 20, 2012, to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely submitted AE B that was admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 21, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old electronics technician who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since January 1999. He graduated 
from high school in 1990 and attended college for about three years. He served in the 
Army from November 1994 to November 1998, attained the grade of specialist (E-4), 
and received an honorable discharge. He is divorced and was married from 1994 to 
2007. He has two sons, ages 9 and 15. He has held security clearances without incident 
from 1995 to 1998 and from 2003 to present.1  
 
 The SOR alleged ten delinquent debts totaling about $105,568. In his answer, 
Applicant admitted seven of those debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.j) 
totaling about $98,570. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. Credit 
reports admitted into evidence provide substantial evidence of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 
and 1.i.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a divorce and Hurricane Katrina. He 
testified that he and his ex-wife divorced because she used drugs and had extra-marital 
affairs. He also indicated that he is not the biological father of his two children, although 
he claims them as his children. He noted that he is listed on their birth certificates as 
their father, and they believe he is their father. He pays $420 per month in child support. 3 
 
 Before the divorce, Applicant and his ex-wife had a home that was totally 
destroyed during Hurricane Katrina in 2005. They had flood insurance coverage up to 
$100,000 on that home. After the storm, they obtained a U.S. Government loan of 
$39,000 to assist them in recovering from the disaster. They eventually sold the 
property after encountering difficulties in obtaining building permits. They bought a new 
home in February 2006.4  
 
 Applicant testified that his ex-wife was financially irresponsible. For example, 
while on business trips or on other occasions before their divorce, he provided her 
money to pay the mortgage, but she would spend that money on other things. After one 
                                                          
1 Tr. 4-7; GE 1; AE B. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. 14-16, 21-27, 50-52; GE 2, 3.  
 
4 Tr. 14-16, 21-29, 32-37; GE 2, 4. Applicant was given a one-year grace period before having to 
make payments on the U.S. Government loan.  
 
 
3 
 
business trip, he had to take $2,000 from his 401(k) account to catch up on three 
mortgage payments because she failed to make those payments.5 
 
 As part of their divorce, he and his ex-wife were equally responsible for making 
monthly payments of $176 on the Government disaster recovery loan. Each was 
responsible for making the payment every other month. He stated that she refused to 
make her payments. When the Government loan became delinquent, his pay was 
garnished. The garnishment limited his ability to pay other debts and he fell behind on 
them. Since then, he rehabilitated the Government loan over a six-month period. During 
that period, he made $170 monthly payments. By rehabilitating the Government loan, 
the garnishment will cease, and his disposable income will increase. The Government 
loan is not alleged as a delinquent debt. In their property settlement agreement, his ex-
wife was also responsible for making car payments and paying half of the children’s 
medical bills. She failed to make those payments.6 
 
 The alleged debts are addressed separately below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – judgment for $369. This was a medical debt. The judgment was filed 
in February 2006. In his Answer, Applicant indicated that his ex-wife was responsible for 
half of this debt under their divorce decree. This debt remains unpaid.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $6,062. In his Answer, Applicant denied this 
debt. He indicated that it was the past-due amount of the foreclosed mortgage in SOR ¶ 
1.f, and was a duplicate of that debt. A review of the credit reports supports Applicant’s 
contention.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $808. This is a joint account that Applicant 
had with his ex-wife. It was her cell phone account. He admitted this debt. He stated 
that it became delinquent when she refused to pay her half, and he could not afford to 
pay it along with his other bills and expenses. He indicated that he has not taken any 
steps to settle or resolve this debt in the past five years.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $432. This is a car insurance account that was 
placed for collection in June 2007. Applicant admitted this debt and indicated that his 
ex-wife was ordered to pay this debt in their divorce decree. He also stated that he has 
taken no steps to resolve it.10 
                                                          
5 Tr. 14-16, 21-29, 44-45; GE 2, 4.  
 
6 Tr. 14-16, 32-37; GE 2-4.  
 
7 Tr. 23, 38-39, 51; GE 2-5. 
 
8 Tr. 29-32, 39; GE 4. 
 
9 Tr. 39-40; GE 2, 5. 
 
10 Tr. 27-28, 40-41; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $3,115. From July to October 2003, Applicant 
and two coworkers attended an out-of-state training course. He used his credit card to 
rent a car for the three of them. They used the vehicle separately on the weekends and 
exceeded the mileage the company was willing to reimburse. Applicant was responsible 
for this unreimbursed expense and did not seek reimbursement from the other two 
employees. Before departing for this trip, Applicant made arrangements for his wife to 
pay the household expenses. As noted above, he learned upon his return that she did 
not make the mortgage payments for three months. He withdrew funds from his 401(k) 
account to pay the mortgage and was unable to pay the rental car expenses. No 
evidence was presented to show this debt is resolved.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $93,329. This account was the mortgage on 
the home that Applicant and his ex-wife purchased after Hurricane Katrina. They 
purchased the home for $105,000 with an $18,000 down payment. Their monthly 
mortgage payments were about $880. As part of his March 2007 divorce, Applicant was 
given exclusive use and possession of this home. He was also responsible for all 
mortgage payments, taxes, insurance, and other expenses related to the home. The 
date of last activity on this loan was June 2009. At a foreclosure sale in January 2010, 
the mortgage holder purchased the home for $45,451. Applicant has not contacted the 
mortgage holder to determine whether there is a deficiency on the mortgage loan.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $194. This was a medical debt that was 
placed for collection in February 2006. In his Answer, Applicant indicated that his wife is 
responsible for half of this debt. He testified that he has not done anything regarding this 
debt.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h – collection account for $605.  Applicant denied this debt and claimed 
he had no knowledge of it. He testified that he has not contacted the collection agency 
to determine the original creditor. His credit report, however, indicated that payments 
were made under a partial payment agreement.14 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i – collection account for $331. This debt was a medical bill that was 
placed for collection in April 2010. In his Answer, Applicant denied this debt.15 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j – collection account for $323. This debt was a medical bill that was 
placed for collection in April 2010. In his Answer, Applicant admitted this debt and 
                                                          
11 Tr. 24, 41-45; GE 3. 
 
12 Tr. 28-32, 56-59; GE 2, 3. 
 
13 Tr. 23, 46-48, 51; GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. 26-27, 48; GE 2, 4. 
 
15 Tr. 23, 51-52 GE 5. 
 
 
5 
 
indicated that his wife was responsible for half of it. He has made no payments on this 
debt.16 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He indicated that he recently 
moved into a smaller apartment to cut his expenses. He also stated that he would like to 
start making payments to reduce his medical bills, but could not specify when he could 
begin making such payments. He is currently paying his rent on time and has enough 
money for food and transportation. He indicated that his finances are getting better and 
plans to get married around the beginning of next year. In December 2011, he 
submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected his net monthly income 
was $1,840, his total monthly expenses were $1,575, and his monthly debt payments 
were $176, which left him a net monthly remainder of $89. In that PFS, he also noted 
that his girlfriend covered some of the bills that he was unable to pay. Because he 
recently moved to another apartment and reduced his rent payment by $250 per month, 
he indicated that his net monthly remainder would have increased. He filed his federal 
income taxes for 2011, but still owes about $500 in taxes for that tax year.17 
 
 While in the Army, Applicant received the Joint Service Achievement Medal and 
Good Conduct Medal, served as a signal intelligence analyst, and held high level 
security clearances. He submitted letters of reference attesting to his integrity, strong 
work ethic, and high moral character.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
16 Tr. 23, 51-52; GE 2, 5. 
 
17 Tr. 49-54, 59-62; GE 2, 3.  
 
18 Tr. 54-55; AE A, B. 
 
 
6 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
over a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has a number of delinquent debts that remain unresolved. His financial 
problems are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since 1999. He was a victim of 
Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and obtained a divorce in 2007. In the property settlement 
agreement, his ex-wife was responsible for various debts. However, she refused to pay 
her debts. In particular, when she failed to pay her half of the Government disaster 
recovery loan, Applicant’s pay was garnished. This garnishment reduced his disposable 
income and caused him to default on other loans. The hurricane, his divorce, and his 
ex-wife’s failure to pay her share of the joint debts were conditions beyond his control. 
To receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), however, an applicant must show not only that 
financial problems resulted from conditions beyond his or her control, but also that he or 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Here, Applicant provided no proof of 
payments towards the alleged debts. He has not received any financial counseling. He 
has not remained in contact with some of the creditors. He does not know how much he 
owes on the foreclosed mortgage. He has not presented a realistic plan for resolving 
these debts. In short, he failed to establish that his delinquent debts are being resolved 
 
8 
 
or are under control. Based on the evidence presented, I cannot find that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 1.f. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
 In summary, Applicant has failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
alleged debts. His financial problems remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and his years of service to his current 
employer. He encountered two significant financial setbacks, i.e., the hurricane and 
divorce, within a three year period. His ex-wife’s conduct contributed to his financial 
problems. On the other hand, he has been continually employed since 1999. He has 
taken little action to resolve the alleged debts. His financial situation remains unstable, 
and he failed to present any plan for resolving the alleged delinquent debts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c –1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
