 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-14764 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns. His past financial 
problems were due to a long period of unemployment and underemployment during 
which his wife divorced him after 19 years of marriage. Immediately after securing his 
current job in September 2011, Applicant started to resolve his debts – the vast majority 
of which are student loans. He submitted proof of a track record of consistent payments 
to satisfy his debts and demonstrated that his financial situation is under control. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Procedural History 
 
On April 25, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations).1 On May 18, 2012, Applicant submitted his Answer to the 
SOR and requested a decision on the administrative record. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On May 30, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), which contains Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant submitted an 
undated Response to the FORM (Response). The Response contains proof of 
payments and a character reference, which were marked and admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A – G. I was assigned the case on July 19, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his forties. He is a veteran of the U.S. military, who was honorably 
discharged in 1998. He has two children, who are 17 and 20 years old. He recently 
divorced after 19 years of marriage. In 2001, Applicant enrolled in an online college to 
pursue his bachelor’s degree. He completed his studies and earned a degree in 
information technology in 2003. He previously held a security clearance while in the 
U.S. military, and for a short time in 2005, while working for a federal contractor.2 
 
Applicant’s financial trouble began in May 2005 when he decided to move closer 
to his family. He was then either unemployed or only able to find short term work until 
September 2011, when he was hired by his current employer. Applicant’s financial 
trouble worsened as a result of his divorce, which was finalized in December 2010. 
During this period of financial instability, Applicant defaulted on his student loans and a 
few other financial obligations.3  
 
The SOR lists approximately $80,000 in delinquent debt. All but about $4,500 of 
this debt is attributable to the student loans Applicant took out to pursue his bachelor’s 
degree. Prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant resolved the majority of his debts by 
entering into payment arrangements with his creditors. The only SOR debts that are not 
currently being paid are Applicant’s federal student loans. They are currently in 
forbearance status and a payment is not due until October 2012. He is making 
consistent, monthly payments on his other non-federal student loan debt. The chart 
below provides a summary of each SOR debt and its current status. 
 
SOR ¶ Amount Type of Debt Status 
1.a $1,045 phone service Agreed to payment plan with creditor of $50 per 
month and submitted proof of having made monthly 
payments totaling over $175. (AE A) 
1.b $2,861 credit card In February 2012, settled for less than half of 
outstanding balance, agreed to a payment plan with 
creditor of $50 per month, and submitted proof of 
having made monthly payments totaling $150. (AE B) 
1.c $8,244 student loan In January 2012, consolidated student loans, agreed 
to a payment plan with creditor, and has been paying 
$180 per month. (AE C)  
1.d $10,521 student loan In January 2012, entered into a payment plan and 
has been paying $105 per month. (AE D) 
                                                          
2
 GE 5-6; Response.  
 
3
 GE 5-6; Response.  
 
3 
 
 
1.e $11,062 student loan In December 2011, entered into a payment plan.  
Paid $600 the first two months and, thereafter, has 
been paying $110 bi-weekly per agreement. (AE E) 
1.f $520 phone service Paid per settlement that was agreed to in March 
2012. (AE F) 
1.g $7,700 student loan Consolidated and in forbearance status.  
Monthly payments of $126 scheduled to start in 
October 2012. (Answer at 6 and 37; Response) 
1.h - m $24,500 student loans See 1.c above.  
1.n – o $13,800 student loans See 1.g above. 
 
 Applicant has been living with his parents since July 2010, which has allowed 
him to cut down on his living expenses. He has about $1,000 a month left over, after 
paying his monthly expenses, to satisfy his debts. He has received financial counseling 
through his church and has not accumulated any further debt.4 His employer writes: 
 
(Applicant) has been one of my most reliable and trustworthy employees 
since being hired . . . (He) shows up for work each and every day on time 
and ready to work He takes on whatever challenge is in front of him, and 
does an excellent job. . . . The ability to manage and execute programs 
involving highly technical equipment requires personnel that are both 
trustworthy and stable. (Applicant) has both of these characteristics, and 
that is why I am providing my strongest recommendation to allow him to 
retain his clearance.5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
                                                          
4
 GE 5-7; Response.  
 
5
 AE G (emphasis in original).  
 
 
4 
 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”6 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
                                                          
6
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 26, 2012) (The Guideline F concern “is broader than a concern that an applicant might 
commit criminal acts in order to pay off his debts. Rather, Guideline F requires a judge to consider the 
totality of an applicant’s circumstances–the reasons underlying his financial problems and his efforts to 
address them–in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the applicant possesses the judgment and 
self-control required of those who have access to national security information.”) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of student debt. A situation that is 
neither uncommon, nor sufficient on its own to raise a concern. However, Applicant 
defaulted on his student loans and became delinquent on his other debts. He did not 
address his debts for several years. It is this history of financial irresponsibility that 
raises the financial considerations concern and establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”7 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is, in part, due to matters beyond his control. 
Specifically, a long period of unemployment and underemployment from May 2005 to 
September 2011 that was then compounded by a divorce. However, Applicant’s inability 
to find full-time work until relatively recently is as much due to his initial decision to leave 
his former job and move closer to his family as it is the economy. Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and (b) only partially apply.  
 
 On the other hand, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) fully apply. Applicant initiated a good-
faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts shortly after being hired by his current 
                                                          
7
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
6 
 
 
employer and well before the SOR was issued. He has either paid or been paying the 
vast majority of his debts for the past six months or longer per the terms of the 
agreements he entered into with his creditors. When the forbearance period on his 
federal student loan ends in October 2012, Applicant has the means to satisfy the $126 
monthly payment. He has received financial counseling and has not amassed any new 
debt. He is now in a position to satisfy his debts in part because he lowered his living 
expenses by moving in with his parents. A decision that demonstrates his commitment 
to satisfy his financial obligations and is the type of responsible conduct expected of 
those granted access to classified information. Applicant’s past financial issues no 
longer casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I incorporate my above analysis herein and note some 
additional whole-person factors. Applicant’s delinquent debts are not a result of frivolous 
spending or other matters that would themselves raise a security concern. Instead, his 
financial problems were due, in part, to high student debt and an inability to find full time 
employment over the past several years. He worked several temporary jobs between 
2005 and 2011, but was never able to earn enough income to pay the high level of 
student debt he amassed pursuing his bachelor’s degree. However, after starting at his 
current job, Applicant commenced actions to resolve his debts and provided 
documentary proof of a track record of consistent payments towards satisfaction of his 
debts. He is close to his family, especially his youngest daughter who he has taught the 
game of golf with the hope that she will be able to secure a scholarship and avoid 
similar financial hardship. Applicant served in the military honorably, previously held a 
security clearance for many years apparently without issue, and has the full support of 
his employer. These favorable whole-person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating 
conditions noted above, fully mitigate the financial considerations concern. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. 
 
                                                          
8
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
