 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 12-03363 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, and foreign 
influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline D (sexual 
behavior), Guideline E (personal conduct), and Guideline B (foreign influence). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 14, 2015, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 15, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted her file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete copy to 
Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on June 14, 2016. He was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2017. 
 
Department Counsel offers FORM Items 3 and 4, which are admitted into 
evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 3 and 4, without objection.1 FORM Item 5 is 
Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice and the supporting materials. 
FORM Item 5 is admitted for administrative notice as Administrative Notice (AN) I. 
Applicant’s FORM response includes a copy of the FORM with notations and a family 
photograph, which are admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant paid four foreign-national prostitutes for sex 
between August 2006 and January 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.). The SOR also alleges 
his foreign contacts with these prostitutes and his Georgian family members (SOR ¶ 3). 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 57 years old. He was born in Zimbabwe. His father, two brothers, 
and two sisters are citizens of and reside in Zimbabwe. He has one sister who is a 
citizen of Zimbabwe and lives in the United States. He has a 28-year-old son who is a 
citizen of and resides in Zimbabwe.2  
 
 In 1982, Applicant married a U.S. citizen in the United States, and they divorced 
in 1984. He married a Zimbabwean citizen in Zimbabwe in 1985, and they separated in 
1986. He attended trade school in the U.S. from 1992 to 1997, and he received an 
associate’s degree. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1998.3 
 
 From  June 2006 to November 2007, Applicant was employed as a contractor for 
another government agency (AGA), and he held a security clearance from the AGA. He 
was posted in the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Since November 2008, Applicant 
has been employed by DOD contractor and posted in Iraq.4 
 
 From August 2006 to May 2007, Applicant had a relationship with woman who 
was a citizen of and resided in the PRC. He had contact with her more than 15 times 
during this span. Although Applicant paid her and she was a prostitute, he claims that 
he paid for her companionship and not sex. His contact with her ceased in May 2007, 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1 and 2 are the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are included in the record. 
 
2 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
3 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
4 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
3 
 
when the regional security officer (RSO) assigned to the U.S. embassy directed him to 
cease all contact with her.5  
 
 Between June 2006 and November 2007, Applicant paid for sex with a prostitute 
who was a citizen of and resided in Mongolia. He had contact with her approximately 
three to seven times during this span.6 
 
 Between July 2006 and February 2009, Applicant paid for sex with a prostitute 
who was a citizen of and resided in the PRC. On at least one occasion, Applicant 
traveled to the PRC to pay her for sex. Even after their in-person contacts ceased in 
February 2009, Applicant maintained phone contact with her until October 2010.7 
  
 Between February 2009 and at least June 2011, Applicant paid for sex with a 
prostitute who was a PRC citizen and resided in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). He 
had in-person contact with her approximately three to seven times a year, and they had 
monthly video-telephonic contact until at least June 2011, while he was a DOD 
contractor in Iraq.8 
 
 In about May 2011, Applicant met a citizen and resident of Georgia, whom he 
later married in Georgia in May 2013. Between May 2011 and September 2014, he 
made approximately 14 trips to see her and her family. In May 2012, she became 
pregnant, and their daughter was born in February 2013.9  
 
 Applicant’s wife, stepson, parents-in-law, brother-in-law, and wife’s grandmother 
are citizens of and reside in Georgia. Applicant and his wife now have two children 
together, and these children reside with his wife in Georgia. There is no evidence as to 
his wife’s and in-law’s occupations, backgrounds, or connections with the Georgian 
government or military. There is no evidence as to what educational, financial, or social 
benefits Applicant’s family may receive while residing in Georgia.10 
 
 During his June 2011 security interview, Applicant claimed that, during an initial 
briefing with the U.S. embassy RSO, he was informed that he was permitted to engage 
the services of prostitutes as long as he reported the dates, names, pictures, and nature 
of the interactions. Applicant has provided no documentation to corroborate this claim or 
whether this RSO briefing was during his AGA employment or his DOD employment. 
Finally, there is no documentation that Applicant adhered to his reporting requirements 
or that Applicant’s wife and in-laws are aware of his activities with foreign-national 
                                                          
5 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
6 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
7 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
8 GE 3; GE 4. 
 
9 GE 4. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
4 
 
prostitutes. During his June 2011 security interview, Applicant admitted that his U.S. 
girlfriend of 20 years was unaware of his activities with foreign prostitutes.11  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about the country of 
Georgia: Georgia is a constitutional republic with a developing democracy and 
economy. The United States established diplomatic relations with Georgia in 1992 
following Georgia’s 1991 independence from the Soviet Union. The United States 
supports Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally 
recognized borders and does not recognize the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and 
South Ossetia currently occupied by Russia. These regions were seized by the Russian 
military following a 2008 military conflict between Russia and Georgia. In violation of the 
2008 ceasefire accords, Russia established military bases in Abkhazia and South 
Ossetia.12 
 
 The Department of State strongly warns U.S. citizens against travel to the 
Russian-occupied regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. In the past, Georgia has 
experienced several improvised explosive device attacks and attempted attacks, both in 
Tbilisi and elsewhere in the country. Targets have included government facilities, public 
places, and diplomatic missions. There are continuing concerns about Georgia as a 
transit and source country for international terrorism. In 2014, there were an estimated 
50 to 100 Georgian nationals fighting in Syria and Iraq for either al-Qa’ida affiliates or 
ISIL. Given Georgia’s geographic location and border security challenges, Islamist 
extremists continue to transit though the country between the Russian Federation’s 
North Caucasus and Syria and Iraq.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
11 GE 4. 
 
12 AN I. 
 
13 AN I. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”14 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
                                                          
14 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 
F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 13, the following disqualifying conditions potentially apply: 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Between 2006 and at least June 2011, Applicant paid foreign-national prostitutes 
for sex on several occasions, while he was deployed as a contractor for an AGA and the 
DOD. He did not reveal these activities to his girlfriend at the time, and there is no 
evidence that he has informed his wife of these activities. His contacts with at least one 
prostitute continued after he met his wife. Furthermore, there is no documentary 
evidence that he reported his foreign contacts as required by his employer. Applicant’s 
activities while in a cleared or sensitive position posted in a foreign country reflect 
questionable judgment and expose him to coercion and exploitation. AG ¶¶ 13(c) and 
13(d) apply.15 
  
 Because the Government established security concerns under AG ¶¶ 13(c) and 
13(d), the burden shifts to Applicant to present evidence in mitigation. Under AG ¶ 14, 
the following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s activities with prostitutes has recurred since 
June 2011. He is now married and has two minor children. Although his activities with 
prostitutes are unlikely to recur, this conduct while an AGA and DOD contractor in a 
foreign country still reflects questionable judgment. Applicant bears the burden to 
demonstrate reform, rehabilitation, and good judgment. AG ¶ 14(b) does not apply. 
 
 There is no documentary evidence that Applicant has informed his wife or in-laws 
about his past activities with foreign-national prostitutes or that he adhered to the 
reporting requirements with his employer. AG ¶ 14(c) does not apply. 
 
                                                          
15 Department Counsel did not establish that Applicant’s activities with the prostitutes were illegal in the 
countries where these activities occurred. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant has provided no information about the nature or circumstances of his 
sexual encounters with the foreign-national prostitutes to establish that his activities 
were strictly private, consensual, and discreet. AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s activities with foreign-national prostitutes while deployed as a 
contractor with an AGA and the DOD raise concerns about his reliability and good 
judgment. He has not demonstrated that he adhered to his employer’s reporting 
requirements or that he is not vulnerable to coercion. I find that sexual behavior security 
concerns remain. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns under this guideline is set out under AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or other failure 
to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 16, the following disqualifying conditions potentially apply: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for any adverse  
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
  Applicant’s activities with foreign-national prostitutes raise concerns about his 
judgment and reliability and create a vulnerability to exploitation. His conduct was illegal 
in the United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) 
apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to present evidence in mitigation. Under 
AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
 
8 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Although Applicant’s activities with prostitutes occurred several years ago, this 
conduct while an AGA and DOD contractor reflects questionable judgment. Applicant 
bears the burdens of production and persuasion to demonstrate reform and 
rehabilitation. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
 There is no documentary evidence that Applicant adhered to his employer’s 
reporting requirements or that his wife is aware of his contacts with foreign-national 
prostitutes. AG ¶17(e) does not apply. I find that personal conduct security concerns 
remain. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
  
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding [sensitive] information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”16 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security.”17 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
 
9 
 
the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
 
One disqualifying condition under this guideline is relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
To establish AG ¶ 7(a) the Government must demonstrate a “heightened risk” 
due to Applicant’s foreign contacts. The administrative notice materials – outlining 
Georgia’s geopolitical security profile, Russia’s significant influence in Georgia, and 
Georgia’s position as a transit and source county for international terrorism – establish 
the “heightened risk” element under AG ¶ 7(a) as to his relatives in Georgia. As to his 
contacts with the foreign-national prostitutes, the nature of these relationships 
establishes the “heightened risk” element under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s contacts with the four foreign-national prostitutes began in 2006 and 
ceased in 2011. There is no evidence of any ongoing contacts, relationships, or 
obligations. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply to his contacts with these prostitutes, and I 
find that Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised by his 
contacts with these prostitutes.  
 
Applicant’s spouse, stepson, and in-laws are citizens of and reside in Georgia, 
and his two minor children reside in Georgia. Applicant has not provided any evidence 
about his wife’s and in-law’s occupations, contacts, and connections with the Georgian 
 
10 
 
government and military. He bears the burdens of production and persuasion in 
mitigation.18 AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply as to his family members in Georgia. 
 
Applicant’s strong ties to his spouse, children, and in-laws are established by his 
frequent visits and prevent me from concluding that his obligation to his Georgia 
relatives is “so minimal.” Although Applicant has been employed as an AGA and DOD 
contractor overseas for the last decade, he has not provided any evidence of deep and 
longstanding relationships in the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply to Applicant’s 
contacts with his relatives in Georgia. 
 
 Applicant’s frequent visits to his family in Georgia buttress the presumptions that 
his relationships with his immediate family members and his wife’s family members are 
not casual.19 AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to his relatives in Georgia. Applicant’s strong ties 
with his relatives in Georgia remain unmitigated foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline C and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 While deployed as an AGA and DOD contractor, Applicant demonstrated 
questionable judgment when he paid foreign-national prostitutes for sex. These 
activities remain a security concern as there is no evidence that his wife is aware of 
these contacts or that he adhered to his employers’ reporting requirements. Applicant’s 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 08-04488 at 6 (App. Bd. Apr. 23, 2009) (“[G]iven Applicant’s burden of production 
in mitigation, the Board is not able to conclude that the evidence of record is sufficient to overcome the 
government’s security concerns.”). 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 7 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
11 
 
strong ties with his family members in Georgia constitute an unmitigated security 
concern, particularly absent evidence of his strong ties and relationships in the United 
States. I conclude that Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, 
and foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.b.-3.c.:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
