 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the use of information technology systems and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines M (use of 
Information technology systems) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 25, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 25, 2016. In June 2016, Applicant responded with a two-
page letter and 34 pages of documentation attached. These attachments have been 
collectively marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and are admitted into evidence without 
objection.1 The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2017. The Government exhibits 
identified as Items 1 through 9 included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
his current position, off and on, since 2006 for various contractors. He served honorably 
in the Air Force from 1986 - 1992. He has been married since 1986, and reports five 
adult children.2 Applicant has been forward deployed to both Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Applicant reports previous security clearances going back to 1985, including a top 
secret clearance from 1989 - 2003, with no issues.3 
 
Applicant was terminated by a federal contractor in 2003 for time card fraud.4 
Applicant was counseled for this same offense on previous occasions before he was 
terminated.5 Yet, he listed the reason for leaving this employment as “end of contract” in 
section 13A of his 2012 SCA.6 Applicant claims that he misunderstood the questions in 
the SCA to only require a seven-year look back.7 Yet, in his subject interview in October 
2008, Applicant contends that his termination actually resulted from a personality 
dispute with his supervisor at the time.8 He suggests that his supervisor retaliated 
against Applicant who had earlier reported that supervisor for an unrelated security 
violation. Applicant has now admitted that he was terminated in 2003 for time-card 
fraud, but seems to deny that he actually committed that fraud.9 
 
Applicant was terminated by another federal contractor-employer in 2011. In his 
2012 SCA, Applicant claims that this was due to a reduction in force and restructure of 
                                                          
1 AE A, attachments to Response to FORM, including 16 letters of recommendation; 4 certificates of 
appreciation; and 2 training certificates. 
 
2 GE 4 and 5.  
 
3 GE 7. 
 
4 GE 6, and GE 7 at page 1.  
 
5 GE 6. 
 
6 GE 5, at page 19. 
 
7 GE 2, Answer to SOR. 
 
8 GE 7. 
 
9 GE 2, Answer to SOR, and GE 7 
 
 
3 
 
the department.10 Applicant later admitted that he was in fact fired due to misuse of his 
employer’s laptop computer, by accepting pornographic images found there on his e-
mail account. Applicant was aware of company policy regarding inappropriate materials 
on his computer but did not think that an IT scan of the computer would include this e-
mail account.11 Applicant claims that he did not list this reason for termination on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions/Security Clearance Application (SCA) 
because his employer told him not to discuss it, as it was confidential.12 Applicant also 
claims that this matter was investigated previously by OPM and the outcome was 
favorable to Applicant.13 However, he provided no documentation to corroborate these 
contentions.  
 
Applicant is an Air Force Veteran and he raised five children. He provided 3 
certificates of appreciation from his federal contractor-employer, a letter of appreciation 
from the U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, and 16 impressive letters of 
recommendation. These were attached to his Response to the FORM. All attest to his 
courage, professionalism, work ethic, honesty and integrity, especially while working 
overseas under adverse circumstances. He is obviously highly respected by his 
superiors, subordinates and peers and has contributed a great deal.   
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
10 GE 5. 
 
11 GE 8 at page 2. 
 
12 GE 8, at page 2.  
 
13 GE 2, Answer to SOR.   
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations pertaining to information technology systems, is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise a concern about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information technology systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology    
            system. 
 
 Applicant admits to using his employer’s laptop to accept pornographic images 
on his personal e-mail account, in violation of that employer’s policies. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition.  
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
There is insufficient evidence in the written record for a determination that 
enough time has elapsed since the 2011 computer misuse, or that it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant failed to disclose this 
misuse on this April 2012 SCA. Although, he does not deny the presence of the 
pornographic images on his work computer, he seems to minimize the significance, or 
dispute the validity of his termination. It is not clear that he has fully accepted 
responsibility for this transgression. It continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) is partially applicable. None of the 
other mitigating conditions are applicable. I find that use of information technology 
systems concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
6 
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes, 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
     (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client    
     confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release  
     of sensitive corporate or other protected government information; 
 
     (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; 
 
     (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
     (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s 
     time or resources; and    
 
(e) personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country, but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s time card fraud, and repeated counseling for that fraud, is 
substantiated by the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) entries. He does not 
deny it in his Response to the FORM, but minimizes it by saying that he was fired for a 
one hour discrepancy. This repeated time card fraud betrays questionable judgment, an 
unwillingness to follow rules and regulations, and a significant misuse of his employer’s 
time. AG ¶ 16(d)(4) applies. 
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information on his SCA, his 
intent is an issue. Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant claims that he misread the question to only require a seven-year look back, 
with respect to his 2003 termination. Yet, Applicant has not yet accepted full 
responsibility for this fraud, despite repeated counseling, reflected in the JPAS entries. 
Instead, he blames it on a personality dispute with his supervisor, without providing a 
shred of evidence to document that dispute. This, combined with his failure to disclose 
the more recent 2011 computer misuse, leads me to believe that this was not an 
 
7 
 
oversight. Instead, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the reasons for these two 
terminations on his 2012 SCA, rather than inadvertently omitting the true reasons. 
Therefore, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) applies. None of the conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns enumerated in AG ¶ 17 applies.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and M in this whole-person analysis.  
  
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is an Air Force veteran and long-time defense contractor 
employee. He raised five children, and he has held a security clearance for most of his 
adult life. He is held in high regard by his friends and associates as evidenced by the 16 
impressive character reference letters. Nonetheless, this information is not sufficient to 
overcome the recent security concerns raised by his misuse of his company computer, 
and his failure to disclose the reasons for his two terminations. It was incumbent on 
Applicant to produce information that sufficiently addresses the factual allegations in this 
case. He did not do so. Available information leaves me with doubts about his current 
suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest 
is the principal focus in these adjudications, any unresolved doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct or use of information technology systems security 
concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:             Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:   Against Applicant 
   
   
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
   Administrative Judge 
