       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 12-06403
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and file exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
History of Case
On April 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why the DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or. 10865),
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AGs) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
      04/14/2017
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 25, 2016, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on May 4, 2016, and submitted post-FORM information within the 30-
day period allowed. Applicant’s post-FORM submission consisted of documentation of
his payoffs of SOR debts ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.l. Applicant claimed that he disputed
SOR debts ¶¶ 1.I and 1.j, which have since been removed from his credit report. And
he provided documentation of his entering into a rehabilitation plan with creditor 1.a and
tendering a $194 payment to the creditor in April 2016. Applicant’s supplemental
submissions were admitted without objection as Items 6-11.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 12 delinquent debts,
exceeding $60,000. Allegedly, the listed delinquent debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the listed debts with
explanations. He claimed he intended to make monthly payments on the delinquent
student loan he obtained to fund his son’s college education. He claimed the debts
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f and 1.k will be paid off as soon as possible. Applicant
denied owing the debts covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.1i and 1.j, claiming they are not his debts.
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 55-year-old model technician for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in February 1991 and has one adult child from this marriage,
age 21. (Item 3) Applicant earned a diploma in June 1979 from a vocational school. He
has never served in the military. (Item 3)  Applicant has worked for his current employer
since June 1985 as a model technician. (Item 3) 
Finances
Applicant co-signed for his son’s student loan in September 2012 in th amount of
$23,348. (Item 5) Sometime in 2014, both Applicant and his son defaulted on the loan.
Whether Applicant was aware of his son’s default before he received the SOR in April
2015 is unclear. Explanations likely were provided by him in his summary of interview
by an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) However, his OPM
summary of interview was not included in the FORM for review.
Applicant and his wife purchased a vehicle in January 2010 and financed it with
a $28,800 car loan. (Items 4 and 5) He defaulted on his loan payments in February
2012, and creditor 1.k repossessed the vehicle with $24,289 owing on the car loan.
(Items 4 and 5) 
2
Credit reports document Applicant’s incurring additional delinquent between
December 2008 and May 2011 consist of the following: SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,073); 1.c
($$1,373); 1.d ($620); 1.e ($103); 1.f ($69); 1.g ($5,058); 1.h ($377); 1.i ($124); 1.j
($958); 1.k ($24,289); and  1.l ($219). (Items 4 and 5)
Two of the listed debts are disputed by Applicant. (Items 3 and 4):SOR ¶¶ 1.i and
1.j, which allege debts owing of $69 and $95, respectively. (Items 3 and 4) Applicant
claimed no awareness of these debts. (Items 2 and 6)
Applicant provided no explanations of how he became delinquent with consumer 
creditors. The circumstances surrounding his incurred debts are lacking in details of how
his listed debts became delinquent and why he did not address them before he received
the SOR in April 2015.  As with his student loan debt, explanations likely were provided
to the OPM agent who interviewed him, but are not available in the FORM for review.
Applicant provided documentary evidence of his payments of a number of his
debts. Creditors paid off include the following debts: creditor 1.g ($5,068); creditor 1.h
($377); creditor 1.k ($24,289); and creditor 1.l ($219) All of these debts are confirmed by
the respective creditors to have a zero balance. 
Additionally, Applicant completed a repayment agreement with his son’s student
loan lender (creditor 1.a) in June 2015 that calls for monthly payments of $194. (Item 8).
He provided a copy of a $194 monthly payment made in April 2016 and assured his
student loan account has been restored to current status. (Item 8) While Applicant did
not provide an account history detailing all of his monthly payments to creditor 1.a under
his rehabilitation agreement, he appears to be back in good standing with this creditor.
His assurances are accepted.
To date, Applicant has paid off or settled all but three of the listed debts. Only the
debts covered by SOR  ¶¶ 1.b ($2,073), 1.c ($1,373), 1.d ($620); 1.e ($103); 1.f ($69);
1.i ($124); and 1.j ($958) have not been paid or settled. Applicant has consistently
disputed the creditor 1.i and creditor 1.j debts on grounds the debts are not his debts. 
(Items 2 and 6) While not corroborated by any updated credit report, his assurances are
accepted. Applicant’s credit reports in the FORM are of 2012 and 2014 vintage and
cannot be fully relied on for evaluating the status of these listed debts.
Applicant did not provide any evidence of financial counseling or budgeting. Nor
did he provide any endorsements, performance evaluations, or evidence of community
and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
3
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
4
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a model technician for a defense contractor who accumulated a
number of unexplained delinquent debts. His accumulation of delinquent debts
between December 2008 and May 2011 and his failure to address these debts in a
timely way warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). 
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s incurred delinquencies and
his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly before receiving the SOR in April
2015. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only have most of
his listed debt delinquencies been ongoing before the issuance of the SOR in 2015,
but he failed to address them until after his receipt of the SOR.
5
 Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, few extenuating
circumstances can be traced to Applicant’s historical inability to pay off or otherwise
resolve his debts. Explanations of Applicant’s being delinquent with his son’s student
loan and Applicant’s other debts quite likely were covered in his OPM interview
summary (not included in the FORM for review). Available in part to Applicant is MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has taken responsible steps in resolving his
delinquent debts covered by ¶¶ 1.a, 1-g-1.h, and 1.k-1.l. Mitigation credit for the debts
he has addressed is available to Applicant based on the evidence developed in this
record. MC ¶ 20 (d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is applicable to Applicant’s situation.
Only Applicant’s debts covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f and 1.i-1.j are not resolved 
by either documented payments or a payment plan. These debts total around $5,000
in the aggregate and represent less ten percent of the more than $60,000 in listed
debts covered by the SOR. Two of these debts (creditors 1.i and 1.j) have since been
removed from Applicant’s credit report and are covered by evidence of reasonable
disputes initiated by Applicant over his payment responsibilities for these two debts.
Based on the evidence presented, Applicant is entitled to the mitigation benefits of
MC ¶ 20 (e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides evidence of actions to
resolve the issue.”
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and renewed efforts to
address his debts after receiving the SOR. Resolution of his delinquent accounts is a
critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his  finances. 
Whole-person assessments are intended to consider not only the developed
adverse information covered in the SOR, but other information as well about the
applicant’s professional and personal history to reach an overall assessment of
security clearance eligibility. While Applicant did not submit any favorable character
references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community and civic
contributions, he documented considerable efforts in resolving his delinquent debts.
Favorable whole-person considerations can be factored into an overall assessment of
Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.
6
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his documented proof of corrective actions he has
taken to address his old debts after receiving the SOR in April 2015, overall conditions
are for making safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his
remaining debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. Favorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:                   For Applicant  
     
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
