   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)  ISCR Case No. 12-11375 
)
 
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James B. Norman, Esquire, Chief Department Counsel
       Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: F. Whitten Peters, Esquire
 John J. Murray, Esquire     
______________
Remand Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 17 June 2016, the Appeal Board remanded this case to me for further
proceedings in accordance with its decision and the Directive. On 12 July 2016, the
Government moved to amend the Statement of Reasons (SOR) to conform to the
evidence. On 15 July 2016, Applicant filed his opposition to the Government’s motion.
On 16 November 2016, I granted the Government’s Motion to Amend to Conform to the
Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-4, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-S and U-AC.1
AE T was admitted for the sole purpose of identifying AE A-S for the record (Tr. 17-18).
1
       04/21/2017
Evidence,  and established a schedule for augmenting the record in view of my ruling (Order).2
On 20 December 2016, Applicant timely filed additional exhibits and argument to
augment the record.  The Government did not respond to the order until 7 February3
2017. On 17 February 2017, Applicant objected to the Government’s response as
untimely filed. I have not considered the Government’s response except to the extent
that it constitutes a statement of no objection to Applicant’s response.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 55-year-old legislative affairs director employed by a U.S. defense
contractor since April 2004. This is a periodic reinvestigation of clearances he has held
since at least May 1982, when he graduated from a U.S. military academy. He has no
history of security violations. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. military until
April 2004, when he retired in paygrade O-5. His exemplary military service included
several combat tours in support of U.S. military operations in the Middle East in the
1990s.  His last military tour was in his branch’s headquarters in the Pentagon (GE 1).4
He excelled at this position (AE H), and at his retirement, received distinguished
recognition (AE I). While serving on active duty, Applicant also earned a post-graduate
degree in business administration in December 1996. When Applicant retired from the
military, he immediately began his job with the defense contractor, doing essentially the
same work he had done for the military (Tr. 58).
Applicant married his first wife in October 1989, and they divorced in October
2001. They had two sons together, born in December 1992 and November 1995.
Applicant remarried in August 2003. He and his second wife have four children together:
“As long as there is fair notice to the affected party and the affected party has a reasonable2
opportunity to respond, a case should be adjudicated on the merits of relevant issues and not
concerned  with pleading niceties. See, e.g., Yellow Freight System, Inc. v. Martin, 954 F.2d 353,
358 (6  Cir. 1992). The clear import of the precedents discussed in the preceding paragraph is thatth
form should not be elevated over substance to the detriment of a full and fair adjudication of cases
on their merits. The overall purposes of the industrial security program are not well-served by
interpreting the Directive in a manner that emphasizes pleading formalities over a full and fair
adjudication of cases on the merits. Cf. ISCR Case No. 98-0395 (June 24, 1999) at p. 4 n.2
(Directive should be construed broadly in order to effectuate the purposes of the industrial security
program); ISCR Case No. 97-0783 (August 7, 1998) at p. 4  (Adjudicative Guideline should not be
interpreted  in a manner that would operate to detriment of industrial security program or national
security). As long as an applicant receives adequate notice of the allegations against him or her and
a reasonable opportunity to respond, an Administrative Judge should not take a restrictive approach
to SOR amendments.” See, ISCR Case No.99-0447 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2000, at 9-12).
Applicant also renewed his objection to my amending the SOR to conform to the evidence.3
During his deployments, he experienced no problems with filing his taxes. Deployed military receive automatic4
extensions when deployed. Applicant was apparently able to meet the extension deadlines when he returned
from deployment (Tr. 73). He thinks he might have been late with his tax filings after the September 2001
attack on the Pentagon, but that would be the only time his taxes were late while he was in the military.
2
a son born in March 2005, twins (a boy and a girl) born in December 2006, and a
daughter born in January 2011. His current wife is mostly not employed outside the
home (Tr. 78).
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal and state tax returns for
tax years 2008-2010, and that the tax returns remained unfiled at the time of the SOR.
As amended, the SOR covers tax years 2004-2016.
Applicant’s September 2011 clearance application (GE 1) and his October 2011
subject interview with a Government investigator (GE 2) document that Applicant failed
to timely file his Federal and state tax returns for the years alleged. Applicant’s July
2012 Answer denied that his Federal taxes were unfiled, asserting, but not
documenting, that he had filed his 2008 tax return in 2012, and had filed his 2009 and
2010 tax returns in 2013. Applicant admitted that his state taxes were unfiled at the time
of the SOR, again asserting, but not documenting, that he had filed the state returns in
July 2011.
Applicant’s September 2011 clearance application (GE 3) reported no financial
delinquencies, but noted that he had not yet filed his Federal and state taxes for 2008-
2010. Applicant’s October 2011 subject interview (GE 2) covered Applicant’s taxes for
the years he disclosed on his clearance application. Applicant’s September 2011 (GE
4), November 2014 (GE 3), July 2015 (Answer) and October 2015 (AE P) credit reports
reflect that Applicant has no reported financial problems and has excellent credit scores.
Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income taxes between 2004
and 2014 (Tr. 30-31, 66; AE A; AE G). Applicant always over-withholds for his Federal
and state taxes, always applies for available extensions (although he misses the
extended deadlines as well), and always maintains contact with the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) about his taxes.  He also always files his Federal taxes by the deadline5
after which he would forfeit any Federal tax refund due. The IRS has taken neither civil
nor criminal enforcement action against Applicant. The state involved does not impose
any penalty for failure to file if there is a refund due.
Applicant filed his 2008 Federal taxes on 15 April 2012 (AE A); his 2009 Federal
taxes were filed on 15 April 2013 (AE B); and his 2010 Federal taxes on 23 September
2013 (AE C). His 2011 Federal taxes were filed on 15 April 2015. After Applicant
received the SOR in June 2015, he engaged the services of a tax firm to prepare the
remaining tax returns. His 2012 Federal taxes were filed on 23 October 2015 (AE E); his
2013 Federal taxes on 27 October 2015 (AE F); and his 2014 Federal taxes on 29
October 2015 (AE G). His 2014 Federal tax return was due on 15 October 2015.
Applicant’s 2008-2011 state taxes were filed on 11 July 2015 (AE A-D). His 2012-2014
state taxes were filed the same October 2015 dates as his Federal returns (AE E-G).
However, Applicant did not provide independent corroboration of the claimed extensions or communications.5
3
Applicant traces his problems to a series of family circumstances beginning in
2004. In 2004, Applicant bought a new house. In March 2005, his son was born
prematurely, and spent some time in the hospital, but with no apparent long-term
medical issues. His ongoing visitation arrangement with his two oldest sons from his
first marriage required him to drive several hours each way, every other weekend. In
2005-2006, he began having custody and child support issues with his ex-wife because
his oldest son had become old enough to choose with which parent he wanted to live,
and he wanted to live with Applicant. He moved in with Applicant some time in 2006.
Applicant went through a similar situation with his second son around 2009.
In December 2006, Applicant’s twins were born, without apparent medical issues,
but he now had three children under two in the house, along with his teenage son.
Applicant described it as a crazy but happy house (Tr. 32-33). In 2008, Applicant began
what would become a two-year expansion of their four-bedroom house, which they were
rapidly outgrowing. He also was having a second child support dispute with his ex-wife.
Applicant addressed his taxes by filing extensions and making additional payments with
the extension if he thought he might owe the IRS (Tr. 36-37). He took care to file by the
three-year deadline for obtaining refunds (Tr. 38), because forfeiting the refunds would
have cost him a lot of money (Tr. 67).
Applicant’s job often requires him to work long days, which become longer during
budget and appropriations season (Tr. 39, 60). As already noted, he reported his filing
problems with his 2011 clearance application (Tr. 42; GE 1). He also kept his facility
security officer (FSO) informed about the tax situation (Tr. 43, 47; AE L-M ), as well as6
other family issues.
Applicant’s second son attempted suicide in early October 2012 (Tr. 44; AE M)
after he took all the pain medication he had been given for dental surgery at once (Tr.
49). He spent some time in and out of the hospital. A week later, Applicant’s wife had
surgery related to a possible cancer diagnosis (Tr. 89; AE M). Fortunately, she is cancer
free. In April 2013, Applicant’s second son attempted suicide a second time (Tr. 45; AE
N) after he took all the attention deficit disorder medications he had been given (Tr.
51).  This time, he was hospitalized for a longer time. In August 2013, Applicant’s7
second son attempted suicide a third time, when he climbed out on a very high ledge at
a resort hotel where the family was staying (Tr. 46). Applicant described this incident as
really more a suicidal ideation than an actual attempt. His son was upset because his
mother had recently moved overseas to live with her new husband, and the son wanted
his parents to share custody. This was Applicant’s third custody battle with his ex-wife.
Applicant’s second son was coaxed off the ledge, and announced that he did not want
Although it appears that the emails are in response to update requests from Applicant’s security office6
regarding the status of his clearance application.
Applicant’s oldest son, who at this time was attending the same military academy Applicant graduated from,7
took a leave of absence from college to come home and help with his brother’s recovery. However, the oldest
son was himself having some academic problems at school, and after returning to college was unable to catch
up. He was eventually dismissed from school in May 2014 for failing to maintain his grade average (AE R).
4
to hurt himself anymore. The son continued to receive counseling, which was ultimately
unsuccessful, as the son committed suicide in September 2016.
In January 2014, Applicant’s mother had a serious heart attack while vacationing
in another state. Applicant had to spend significant time with her during her recovery,
although he also had his sister and brother to help with her care (Tr. 89-91). Applicant’s
mother was recuperating out of state for about four months, but it is not clear that
Applicant was with her all that time.
Applicant’s FSO—who has been his FSO since Applicant came to work for the
company in April 2004—considers him honest and trustworthy, and recommends him
for his clearance (Tr. 97-106). He also confirms that Applicant informed him of his tax
issues in October 2011, shortly after his interview with the Government investigator. He
also confirmed that Applicant provided periodic updates on his situation, which the FSO
forwarded to corporate security. He does not know what action, if any, corporate
security took on those reports. Similarly, Applicant’s co-worker since 2004 considers
him honest and trustworthy, and recommends him for his clearance, notwithstanding
Applicant’s family circumstances (of which he is aware)(Tr. 108-126; AE J, Q).
However, he is only generally aware that the SOR involves issues of late taxes.
Applicant’s current supervisor since June 2015 stated that Applicant told him about the
tax issues as soon as Applicant became his subordinate in June 2015. He has no
security concerns about Applicant’s late filing of taxes (Tr. 125-137). Applicant’s mother
(AE S) and father (AE R) love their son and would not want anything bad to happen to
him.8
Applicant augumented the record to show that he received refund checks for his
2012-2014 Federal income tax returns (AE U) and his 2012-2014 state income tax
returns (AE V), as well as for his 2015 Federal income tax return (AE W) and 2015 state
income tax return (AE X). Applicant would have faced no civil or criminal penalties for
his failure to timely file his taxes (AE Y). He continues to have an exemplary credit
record (AE AA). His facility security officer, who testified at hearing, continues to
consider Applicant honest and trustworthy, and still recommends him for his clearance
(AE Z). During the pendency of his clearance adjudication, Applicant experienced
difficulties obtaining Transcripts of Tax Return from the Internal Revenue Service (AE
AB, AC). However, I note that these records, among others, are available through the
IRS website, www.irs.gov. 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
Applicant’s father recounts, in more linear form, Applicant’s difficult family circumstances. Applicant’s mother8
echoes those sentiments, albeit in a more folksy fashion. The essence of their input is that Applicant has
always been focused on family, has had complicated family circumstances since he divorced his first wife in
October 2001, and has had stressful jobs since 2000, first at the Pentagon and now at his defense contractor. 
5
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant failed to timely file his state
and Federal income tax returns from 2004 to 2014, a period of 11 years.10
The Appeal Board has long held that failure to timely file required tax returns may 
demonstrate a lack of judgment inconsistent with access to classified information.
A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of
persons granted access to classified information. Indeed, the Board has
previously noted that a person who has a history of not fulfilling their legal
obligation to file income tax returns may be said not to have demonstrated
the high degree of judgment and reliability required for access to classified
information.”11
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).9
¶19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of10
the same;
ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014), reversing Administrative Judge’s favorable decision.11
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0608 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2000)(failure to file for five years).
6
This is true whether the failure to file is willful  or attributed to the press of family12
circumstances.  As recently as December 2015, the Appeal Board upheld a denial of13
clearance, in a case notably similar to this, of an applicant who had failed to file Federal
or state income tax returns for 10 years. 
The filing of tax returns is both a financial and a legal obligation.
Applicant’s . . . failure to have done so for many years is sufficient to raise
a concern that he may be unwilling to follow other rules and regulations,
such as those that govern the handling of classified information. See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) (A person who
fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate
the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted
access to classified information). See also Cafeteria & Restaurant
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960),
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). Indeed, as the Judge noted, Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(g) explicitly provides that failure to file tax returns is a
circumstance that can raise a security concern. Moreover, the Directive
presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any of the
Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. See. e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015). ISCR Case No. 14-
02930 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015)14
Security concerns under Guideline F are not limited to cases in which an
Applicant is financially insolvent or is experiencing difficulty in paying debts. Applicant’s
regular mortgage payments and his timeliness in paying other bills demonstrates his
financial management skills, and shows that he is able to comply with rules and
regulations when he perceives it to be in his interest to do so. Most of what Applicant
cites as justification for his failure to timely file his Federal and state income taxes is
simply described as the ebb and flow of life. Beginning in 2004, he retired from one job
and started another, bought a house, had a child, sorted through child visitation and
child custody issues, had more children, lived through an expansion and renovation of
his home, and had another child. The 18 months between October 2012 and April 2014
were especially difficult for Applicant, with events that can reasonably be considered
circumstances beyond his control: three suicide attempts by his second son, a cancer
scare for his wife, and his mother’s heart attack. But Applicant was already substantially
behind filing his taxes when these events began. Moreover, Applicant’s busy work
schedule was at least as great a contributing factor to his untimely filings as his family
circumstances, and that work schedule was a constant in his life. His tax filing issues
were not largely due to circumstances beyond his control.
See, ISCR Case No. 98-0801 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2000)(tax protester).12
See, ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999)(routine failure to file).13
The cases cited by Applicant’s post-hearing brief all involve cases where the failures to timely file occurred14
over three-four years, and none of them has been identified as an Appeal Board case.
7
In augmenting the record, Applicant renews arguments which were made, and
rejected, in the Appeal Board’s 17 June 2016 decision. “The undisputed position of the
IRS is that a delay in filing is excused for taxpayers who overpay their taxes when they
act in good faith,” and thus Applicant was not required within the meaning of the
Directive to file his income tax returns (Response to Order). Applicant offers the
statement of a former IRS employee, AE Y, for the proposition that Applicant was not
required to file the tax returns at issue. The most that can be said from AE Y is that it is
an opinion, of an individual now in private practice, and that the IRS would find Applicant
not subject to civil or criminal penalties for the reasons recited in the statement. But that
statement is not the statement of the IRS, and even if it was, that statement would not
be binding on the DoD. Applicant correctly points out that the Directive does not specify
when taxes are required to be filed, but the Appeal Board has made it abundantly clear
that tax returns must be filed by the statutory filing date, including any extensions
granted by the IRS, automatically or otherwise, regardless of any mitigation that the IRS
might apply to the taxpayer when no taxes are owed. In this case, the Appeal Board
stated:
Applicant contends the Judge erred in finding his tax returns were not filed
“as required.” In that context, he argues that the decision did not cite to
any tax law, that he was not subject to certain tax statutes (26 U.S.C. §§
6651 and 7203), and that he followed IRS guidance that he had three
years to file a tax return. He pointed out that he did not owe the IRS any
past-due taxes for any of the years in question, and the IRS did not
impose any penalties on him. He did not raise these specific arguments at
the hearing, and the Judge’s decision did not address them.
Applicant’s argument that his tax returns were filed “as required” as long
as he filed them before the expiration of the three-year statute of
limitation for claiming a tax refund is not persuasive and ignores the
Internal Revenue Code’s tax filing deadline and six-month automatic
extension provision. The IRS form for applying for an automatic
extension specifically notes that a late filing penalty is usually charged if
the tax return is filed after the due date, including extensions. No
evidence was presented that Applicant was granted any tax filing
extensions other than the six-month automatic extension. The fact that
the IRS may waive a late filing penalty does not constitute proof that tax
returns were not filed late. Furthermore, his argument regarding the
three-year statute of limitation for claiming a tax refund is unfounded. The
three-year statute of limitation is not a grant of a filing extension, but only
a limitation upon claiming a refund. (Citations omitted). 
In his security clearance application dated September 9, 2011, Applicant
answered “no” to the question that asked whether he failed to file a tax
return when required by law or ordinance, but noted that he was in the
process of “finalizing his 2008-2010 returns and seeking refunds for
overpayment [in accordance with] Federal law allowing 3 years for a
refund after normal date of filing.” (Emphasis added.) In his background
interview, he acknowledged that the IRS was aware he had not filed his
2008-2010 tax returns on time. In his Answer to the SOR, he admitted
8
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b that he failed to file his state tax returns for
2008-2010. While denying the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a pertaining to his
2008-2010 Federal tax returns, he stated that he did not file those tax
returns on time.” At the hearing, he testified that he filed his tax returns
late. Tr. 23-24. Applicant’s admissions throughout the security clearance
process were sufficient to establish that he did not file his 2008-2010
Federal and state income tax returns in a timely manner. The Judge’s
material findings that Applicant’s 2008-2010 tax returns were not filed “as
required” was based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable
characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the record. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
Consequently, the Appeal Board has already found that Applicant failed to file
his 2008-2010 state and Federal income tax returns as required within the meaning of
the Directive. Applicant’s evidence at hearing established that he had similarly failed to
file his 2004-2007 and 2011-2014 state and Federal income tax returns as required
within the meaning of the Directive.15
None of Applicant’s post-Order exhibits establish that he was not also required
to file these other tax returns. To the extent that they constitute further evidence in
extenuation and mitigation, they add little to the order of magnitude represented by his
hearing witnesses and exhibits. The overall outline of his situation remains unchanged.
Applicant reported his 2008-2010 tax filing issues on his September 2011
clearance application. He did not disclose that he had been late filing his 2004-2007
taxes. Subsequently, he was interviewed about his 2008-2010 tax filing issues during
his October 2011 subject interview, but did not discuss his 2004-2007 tax issues.
Presumably, the investigator did not ask, and Applicant did not bring the subject up.16
Nevertheless, dispite the prodding by the investigator, Applicant continued to delay
filing the taxes discussed with the investigator. He took no action to address his taxes
until he received the SOR in late June 2015. Once he  knew that his clearance was at
issue, he hired a tax accountant and took sweeping action to address his remaining
delinquent Federal taxes, each of which was nevertheless filed after the extension
deadline, but before he would lose any refund due.17
Finally, the fact that Applicant over-withheld on his taxes, or otherwise made
extra payments with his extension requests to ensure that he would not owe taxes
once they were filed, and the fact that he dd not to owe any taxes for the tax years in
question, and received refunds for those years, does not mitigate the judgment
¶19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of15
the same;
I have not considered these omission for disqualifying purposes, but only in assessing Applicant’s mitigation16
case, credibility, and whole-person factors.
The Appeal Board recently reversed a decision in a tax case where the Administrative Judge considered only17
the fact that the Applicant’s taxes were all resolved, and gave insufficient weight to the fact that the Applicant
did not take comprehensive action until after he received the SOR. See, ISCR Case No.15-03481 (App. Bd.
Sep. 27, 2016, at 5). The Appeal Board affirmed a denial of clearance where the Applicant had resolved his
tax issues, but had been irresponsible in filing his tax returns. See, ISCR Case No. 14-06201 (App. Bd. Mar.
7, 2000).              .
9
concerns raised by his pattern of failing to file in a timely fashion. Nor does the fact that
the IRS has not undertaken any enforcement action against Applicant, or is likely to do
so. Further, his exemplary careers and his absence of security violations are undercut
by eleven years of security-significant conduct regarding his taxes coincident with that
performance. Finally, the favorable inference to be drawn by the fact that he disclosed
his then-unfiled tax years on his clearance application, is undercut by the fact that he
did not fully disclose his 2004-1007 tax issues. His “whole-person” evidence is
insufficient, in my view, to overcome the security concerns which attach to his conduct.
None of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations fully apply.
Notably, ¶19(g) is the only disqualifying condition that neither expresses nor implies a
concomitant monetary issue, and is the only disqualifying condition that has no specific 
corresponding mitigating condition. However, examining his failure to timely file his tax
returns against those mitigating conditions that clearly contemplate a monetary
component, his evidence still fails to mitigate his conduct. His failures to timely file his
2004-2014 Federal and state taxes are both recent and multiple; to the extent that his
difficult family circumstances from October 2012 to April 2014 contributed to his
failures to timely file, the immediate causes of his problems may be unlikely to recur.18
Nevertheless, to the extent that his failures to file were due merely to the vicissitudes
of life, those circumstances are constant. Similarly, while the medical issues Applicant
confronted between October 2012 and April 2014 were certainly beyond his control,
the other circumstances were not, and some were also essentially a condition of his
employment situation. Moreover, Applicant was not responsible in addressing his
taxes. Applicant points to the number of hours the IRS estimates are necessary to
collect the documentation and complete a tax return as justification for his failures to
timely file his tax returns. Still, he always found time to file his tax returns before he
would lose his refund. Further, Applicant is an intelligent, well-educated man, with both
the skill and experience to know when he should engage professional help. Yet, he did
not do so for many years, and only when his clearance was at risk.19
 
The circumstances of this case do not suggest that Applicant would benefit from
credit or financial counseling, but his taxes have been resolved.  Applicant’s tax20
accountant’s view of his tax situation has been confirmed by the 2012-2014 state and
Federal tax refunds Applicant received. However, Applicant’s tardy contacts with the
IRS cannot be considered a good-faith effort to address his taxes,  to the extent that21
this mitigating condition could be considered applicable. Moreover, Applicant has
mostly disregarded these tax obligations since April 2014, when his mother’s medical
issues were largely resolved. His documented inaction for another year—until April
2015, when he filed his then-oldest Federal tax return—raises significant security
concerns that Applicant had not addressed by the flurry of activity triggered by his
receipt of the SOR. And that flurry of activity fails to mitigate Applicant’s overall course
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that18
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and19
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that20
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.21
10
of conduct, as it cannot overcome my conclusion that Applicant’s track record of
eleven years procrastination makes it too soon to conclude that his security-significant
conduct is behind him, based on his timely filing of his 2015 tax returns. I conclude
Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.  
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
11
