 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11468 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 21, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on May 2, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 11, 2016. Applicant responded with documents that I have 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on 
March 10, 2017. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 and AE 1 
are admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He obtained his high-school diploma in 1984. He 
served in the U.S. military from March 1989 until he retired in August 2010, and is 
considered a 90% disabled veteran. He has worked for a federal contractor since May 
2010. He has held a DOD security clearance since March 1989. He married in 1986, 
divorced in 2000, married again in 2002, and divorced in 2006. He has one adult child 
from his first marriage, and two daughters, ages 17 and 14, from his second marriage. 
As of his August 2012 interview with an authorized DOD investigator, Applicant had 
been living with a cohabitant and her minor daughter since April 2006.1  
   
 The SOR alleged Applicant’s failure to file his federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 and 2011, a student loan charged off for $77,964, and four minor delinquent 
consumer debts totaling $3,844. Applicant admitted to all of the SOR allegations in his 
March 2016 response to the SOR. He stated that he filed his 2010 and 2011 federal 
income tax returns, but did not provide corroborating evidence. He further stated that a 
federal tax levy was entered against him in October 2015 for tax period 2011, and he 
had been paying $535 monthly towards this levy since December 2015. He provided 
retiree account statements from December 2015 to February 2016, and May 2016, 
demonstrating that four payments of $535 were deducted from his account and applied 
to the October 2015 tax levy, and the balance of the levy was $1,234 as of May 2016. 
He planned to next tackle the balance due for his 2010 federal taxes, and expected to 
have it paid by October 2016.2  
 
Credit reports from July 2012 and September 2015 verify the five debts alleged in 
the SOR as ¶¶ 1.b to 1.f. In 2005, Applicant co-signed on the student loan debt, alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b, for his second ex-wife. He first learned that she had not paid it in October 
2010, when the student loan was already delinquent. During his August 2012 interview 
with an authorized DOD investigator, Applicant stated that his ex-wife was paying $200 
monthly towards this debt, but he did not provide corroborating evidence. He further 
stated that he did not intend to make any payments, as he was relying on his ex-wife to 
continue paying it. In March 2016, Applicant contracted with a debt relief service to 
resolve his delinquent debts, to include the student loan debt. He provided a June 2016 
email from the debt relief service indicating that it sent out the first set of investigations 
and disputes on Applicant’s behalf 45 days prior, and Applicant should soon receive 
updates from the three major collection agencies.3   
                                                          
1 Items 1-3.  
 
2 Items 1-3; AE 1. 
 
3 Items 1-5; AE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that his financial problems occurred from 2010 through 2015. In 
2010, one day after filing his 2010 tax returns, he was notified that his filings were 
rejected because his second ex-wife had already claimed their daughters on her tax 
returns, despite Applicant having full custody over them. A custody battle ensued, 
custody was reversed in his ex-wife’s favor, and Applicant was ordered to pay $1,000 
monthly in child support. In August 2010, the state erroneously back-dated the child 
support payments to a period when Applicant’s daughters lived with him, and garnished 
approximately $7,000 from his wages. The state’s error caused a change in the 
deductions on Applicant’s W-4, and lowered the taxes deducted from his paycheck, 
which then caused him to incur a shortage at the end of the year for which he was 
unprepared. He did not have the money to pay his 2010 and 2011 federal taxes when 
they were due. From September 2010 to June 2011, the state mistakenly garnished an 
additional $3,882 from his retirement check towards his child support obligation. From 
January to March 2014, the state also mistakenly deducted $1,640 in medical from his 
pay when his daughters were already covered by TRICARE. Applicant provided seven 
earnings statements from January to April 2014 to show that the erroneous medical 
deductions that occurred from January to March 2014 were corrected in April 2014. 
Applicant also provided his March 2016 payment record with the state child support 
enforcement agency, to show that he made a total of $69,837 in child support payments 
to his ex-wife between January 1999 and March 2016. Applicant noted on the payment 
record that he overpaid her by $4,491.4  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
4 Items 1-5; AE 1. 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 and 2011 
as required, and he has five delinquent debts totaling $81,808. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 While Applicant stated that he filed his 2010 and 2011 federal tax returns, he did 
not provide corroborating documentation. Without more, I have no basis to conclude 
that the October 2015 federal tax levy, for which Applicant has been paying, is the 
balance due on either his 2010 or 2011 federal taxes. Applicant also has five 
unresolved delinquent debts, the largest of which is the student loan debt. Since 
Applicant co-signed the student loan debt with his second ex-wife, Applicant also bears 
responsibility, as demonstrated by the credit reports. He did not provide corroborating 
documentation to show that his second ex-wife has been paying this debt, or that he 
has otherwise resolved it through the help of the debt relief service. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to 
timely file his relevant tax returns and address his delinquent debts casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not demonstrated that he filed his 
relevant federal income tax returns, despite his indication that he had done so. 
Applicant contracted with a debt relief service to assist him with resolving his delinquent 
debts in March 2016, one month after receiving the SOR. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
While Applicant has apparently sought financial counseling through the debt 
relief service, his financial problems are not under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. 
Applicant has not provided evidence of any efforts he may have taken to repay or 
otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has held a DOD security clearance since 1989. After 21 years of 
service, he retired honorably from the U.S. military and is considered a 90% disabled 
veteran. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2010. Circumstances beyond his 
control contributed to his financial problems. He failed to demonstrate that he filed his 
federal income tax returns for 2010 and 2011 as required, and he has financial 
delinquencies that remain unresolved. His finances remain a security concern. He failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
