 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 14-06959 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate public trust concerns regarding Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Her eligibility to occupy a public trust position 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
entails access to sensitive information. The DOD CAF recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether access to sensitive information should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On February 24, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
supplemented that response with e-mails dated March 28, 2016 and March 20, 2016, 
and she did not request a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated April 20, 2016, was provided to her on that same day.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant neither admitted nor denied her SOR allegations, but rather claimed 
that the majority of “these debts” were accrued “after” she certified her SF-86 in May 
2013.  
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old service representative employed by a defense 
contractor since July 2010. (Item 3) She graduated from high school in 2003, and 
attended two different colleges, but has not earned a degree. (Items 3, 4) Applicant 
married in June 2003 and separated in July 2003. Since separation, she has no idea of 
her estranged husband’s whereabouts. (Items 3, 4) Applicant did not list any 
dependents on her SF-86. (Item 3)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant has 28 unresolved debts totaling approximately $18,670, of which 
approximately $12,539 is medical debt. (Items 5 – 7) Applicant stated that she has not 
paid her debts because she does not have the money and because she cares for her 
mother who is dependent on her. (Item 2) Additionally, Applicant’s most recent credit 
report reveals new delinquent debt. (Item 7) There are eight new medical collection 
accounts and several past due accounts in varying amounts. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant has been employed full-time with her current employer since July 2010. 
(Item 3) As of May 2013, she claimed that she was capable of meeting her financial 
obligations despite the fact she lives “paycheck to paycheck.” (Item 4) There are no 
specific details regarding what specifically impacted her ability to keep up with her 
payments, the costs associated with caring for her mother, and why she does not have 
the money to pay her debts as of at least February 2016. There are also no details in 
                                                          
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 20, 2016, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated April 29, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after her receipt to submit information.  
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the record as to Applicant’s efforts since her May 2013 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) to address her debts and, if none, 
the reason for the delay. There is also no information in the record as to how Applicant 
was able to fund her travel to the Dominican Republic and Haiti in June and July 2012. 
(Items 3 – 4)  
 
  The file lacks any evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. 
She did not describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks 
corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes 
for her financial problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that 
Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . 
your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely 
on the evidence set forth in this FORM.” (FORM)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed her May 2013 SF-86, she failed to list required 
information regarding past debts and did not otherwise notify the Government that she 
had any delinquent debts. (Item 3) Furthermore, during her May 2013 OPM PSI, when 
asked if she had any account placed in collection, Applicant indicated “No.” (Item 4) 
Applicant claims that she was never asked for any payment nor received any delinquent 
notices in the mail for any of her medical visits. (Item 4) Applicant stated during that 
OPM PSI that she would “pull up her credit report and contact all of the creditors for 
each account to resolve any remaining balance.” (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations/Personal Conduct 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a trustworthiness concern addressed, in relevant part, 
at AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it 
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
facts established against her. She did not submit any documents in response to the 
SOR or the FORM. Applicant did not show that she had paid or otherwise resolved any 
of her delinquent debt. None of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20 apply. 
 
The Government also met its burden of production in support of the allegation 
under personal conduct. The facts established raise a trustworthiness concern 
addressed in relevant part, at AG ¶ 15 as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
Applicant failed to list her debts as required on her SF-86. It is not credible that 
Applicant received no notices or phone calls on any of these accounts and was 
completely unaware of the state of her financial affairs when she completed her SF-86. 
An applicant’s completion of a security clearance application is the initial step in 
requesting a public trust position and the investigative process is contingent upon the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
honesty of the applicant. Applicant’s explanation is not enough to overcome her willful 
misrepresentation of her true financial situation.3  She knowingly and deliberately chose 
not to disclose complete and accurate information regarding her financial history. None 
of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. 
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guidelines F and E, I have reviewed the record 
before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has 
been gainfully employed since July 2010, and she is presumed to be a mature, 
responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting her financial 
problems or falsification concerns are being addressed, doubts remain about her 
suitability for access to sensitive information. Protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. She failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past 
efforts to address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.bb:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a:   Against Applicant 
                                                          
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
