                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05305
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Charles Hale,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2016. A notice of
hearing, dated October 20, 2016 was issued, scheduling the case for February 23,
2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-E, which were admitted
without objection. I kept the record open until March 2017 for additional submissions,
and Applicant submitted two documents, which were marked as AX F and AX G, and
admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on March 2,
1
2017. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with explanation for each item.
Applicant is 48 years old. In 2010, after a two year separation, he divorced his
first wife. He remarried in 2012. (AX E) He has adult children from his first marriage,
and two stepchildren living with him and his current spouse. He works as a field service
engineer supervisor for a government contractor. (Tr. 16) He has been employed with
the same employer since 1997. Applicant has held a security clearance for 15 years. 
(GX 1) He completed a security clearance application in 2013.
Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force on active duty from 1989 to 1994,
receiving an honorable discharge. From 2006 to the present, he attended an
aeronautical university, but has not yet obtained his undergraduate degree. (GX 1)
Applicant traveled overseas for his employment on several occasions, and in 2013, he
was out of the country working for almost a year.  (Tr. 17)
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts, including a charged-off home equity loan,
medial accounts, and a collection account for automobile insurance. Applicant
explained that the cause of the financial difficulties is a combination of his first wife not
handling the finances appropriately and not paying bills. This was one reason for
separation and divorce. (Tr. 22) This left Applicant with one income. He submitted the
divorce decree, which noted debts that his wife was responsible for paying. (Tr. 25, AX
E) The other debt involved the poor housing market and the fact that Applicant had to
move for his employment to another state. (Tr. 20) In addition, Applicant learned about
his ex-wife’s infidelity during the marriage.
As to the SOR allegations in 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f., Applicant provided
documentation that the accounts were paid. (AX A, B and D). These were medical co-
pays which totaled about $113. Applicant did not know that his ex-wife did not pay the
medical co-pays for his two children. (TR. 28) As a post-hearing submission, Applicant
provided documentation regarding the account in 1.e. (AX G)
Applicant and his first wife bought a home in 2007. They also owned a rental
property. When Applicant and his ex-wife separated, Applicant remained in the marital
home. He moved out of the home after two months, as he could no longer afford the
payments. He told the bank, and the house was sold almost immediately. (Tr. 20) At
that time, Applicant moved into the rental home. In about 2012, Applicant was required
to move to another state for his employment and he completed a short sale for the
rental home.
At issue in SOR debt 1.b for $115,929 is a loan charged off for a second
mortgage on the marital residence. This loan was for the marital home, and repairs that
2
needed to be made when he moved in. (Tr. 22) Applicant testified that the bank never
contacted him or sent notices regarding the creditor in SOR 1.b equity loan, but rather
charged it off almost immediately. (Tr. 23). Applicant acknowledged at the hearing that
he did not understand why the bank immediately charged-off the second mortgage and
did not pursue him. He was candid when he explained it seemed strange to him, but he
believed that since they immediately took that action and did not send him any notices,
that he was relieved of his duty to pay the amount. (Tr. 29) He followed up by saying
that you have to pay what you owe, and that was what he always did in the past.  He
had stopped making payments in 2008. (Tr. 39) However, he also thought that since
the house sold immediately.  He does not recall receiving a Form 1099.1
Applicant testified that before the separation from his first wife, he had normal
expenses in providing for his family and he was responsible with his finances and
covering his expenses and bills. (Tr. 22) He acknowledged that at times things were
tight. He paid other debts that were noted earlier during his investigative interview. (GX
2)
Applicant had tried to contact the bank concerning the debt in 1.b and obtain
some documentation regarding the charged-off equity loan. He did not receive anything
from them or any collection agency. (Tr. 23) He finally pursued the matter through his
attorney. As a post-hearing submission, he provided a detailed letter from the bank that  
the account was charged-off April 2009, and there is no attempt to collect funds for this
account. This letter affirms Applicant’s explanation regarding the equity loan. (AX G) He
provided sufficient information to confirm his testimony that he did not have an account
to pay. (AX F) About two years ago, he obtained a home mortgage in another state for
his present residence. (Tr. 30)
Applicant’s employment position is stable with good health benefits. He currently
has a medical condition for brain lesions. He hopes to work another 15 years. He has
an opportunity for growth and promotion. Applicant’s annual salary is $100,000. He has
earned promotions and his salary has grown from an initial $90,000-$94,000. Applicant
is current with all his expenses. He also receives a military medical retirement of about
$500.  He believes he has about $100,000 in a retirement account. His credit report
(GX 6) shows a “0" balance due  on all accounts. There is a  credit report that shows a
lateness on one of his ex-wife’s accounts.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
GX 2, the interview conducted in 2013 explained that when Applicant’s home was foreclosed in 2009, he      1
told his Air Force security officer and an investigation was held to determine if the issue affected his security
clearance. After the investigation, the Air Force reinstated his clearance eligibility. 
3
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted he owed some delinquent debts and incurred the charged-off
account for his second mortgage. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
 Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment)  partially applies. This happened in 2008 and was
the result of separation and divorce.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies.  As noted above, Applicant’s financial difficulties are a combination of
several things. The separation, divorce, loss of his first wife’s income and the poor
housing market were responsible for the financial crisis. He did not simply walk away
from his financial obligations. Instead, he responsibly resolved several SOR debts and
attempted to determine his financial responsibility for the second mortgager on his
former marital residence that was foreclosed in 2008. This eight-year-old debt is
essentially in an uncollectible status.   He learned that he was not being pursued by the8
bank or any collection company for the debt in the second mortgage. He understood
that he had no responsibility for the debt. I found him credible. 
Compare with ISCR Case No. 15-02903 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) where Board remanded an unfavorable      8
decision and favorably noted that similar matters beyond applicant’s control that impacted finances and the 
resolution of $125,000 in delinquent debt through the debts unenforceability. 
5
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has application. Applicant took steps to pay the
medical accounts and collection account when he learned about them in his interview.
He also paid other non-SOR debts years ago. His current credit report confirms this
status. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is
under control)  applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 48 years old. He served in the Air Force and is a disabled veteran. He is
divorced from his first wife due to her incompetence and negligence in paying
household bills and infidelity. Applicant has held a security clearance for 15 years. He
has worked for the same employer for 20 years. He was financially sound before the
separation and divorce. His income alone without any support from his ex-wife did not
allow him to pay his mortgage. He moved, and the house was sold. He has paid other
non-SOR bills. His credible testimony and documentation provided convince me that in
this case, he acted in a trustworthy and responsible manner. 
Applicant has shown sound judgment and reliability throughout the years. He is
currently in good financial status. He persuaded me that he mitigated the Government’s
case concerning security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. He met
his burden of proof.   
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
