 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04014 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns stemming from his alcohol 
consumption and drug involvement. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, and Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 7, 2016, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 17, 2017, scheduling the hearing for March 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-9 were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D, which were admitted without 
objection. I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns involving Applicant’s alcohol consumption 
and drug involvement. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 52 years old. He has been a DOD contactor since December 1984, 
though he was briefly unemployed from December 2014 until about May 2015.1  
 
 Applicant used marijuana on approximately ten occasions when he was 13 or 14 
years old. He purchased marijuana cigarettes from friends at the time. A few years later, 
he began consuming alcohol. At age 21, his alcohol consumption began to increase to 
the point he was consuming about nine or ten beers a night on the weekends. He was 
charged with and convicted of operating under the influence (OUI) in 1985, 1988, and 
1991. He was twice ordered to attend alcohol treatment. In 1992, during his court-
ordered rehabilitation program, he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and 
polysubstance abuse. His continuing care plan included attendance at Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings, and his prognosis was guarded.2 
 
 In a September 1991 signed, sworn statement, Applicant acknowledged that he 
was addicted to alcohol and considered himself an alcoholic. He admitted to brief 
periods of abstinence followed by relapses, and he expressed an intent to abstain from 
further alcohol use.3  
 
 As a result of his alcohol problems, Applicant’s DOD security clearance was 
initially denied in 1991. At his security clearance hearing in 1993, he testified that he 
had been sober for about 12 months. Applicant’s clearance was granted shortly 
thereafter.4  
 
 Applicant remained sober until about 1995. He then regularly consumed alcohol 
on the weekends. After he moved in 2001 and lived near a neighborhood bar, his 
drinking increased. His alcohol consumption lowered his inhibitions and led to his 
cocaine use. From January 2009 to June 2011, Applicant frequently used cocaine. His 
cocaine use increased to as often as weekly during this period. He purchased cocaine 
through an acquaintance at the neighborhood bar, spending as much as $1,200 a 
month on cocaine. In June 2011, he informed his family and his employer about his 
                                                          
1 GE 1. 
 
2 Response to SOR; GE 3-6; Tr. 40-41 (discharge diagnosis determined by treatment team at hospital). 
 
3 Response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
4 Tr. 39-46. 
 
3 
 
problem with drugs and alcohol. He subsequently tested positive for cocaine and 
voluntarily attended drug treatment for about four months. He was diagnosed with 
alcohol and cocaine dependence, and it was recommended that he attend AA meetings 
and abstain from alcohol and drugs 5  
 
 He remained sober until about spring 2012 and then relapsed into alcohol use. In 
April 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator, and he was still drinking 
alcohol at the time. In November 2013 and November 2014, he relapsed and used 
cocaine about three times during each relapse.6 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant quit his job, sold his house, and moved in with his 
mother about 45 miles away. He regularly attended AA meetings and church services, 
and he avoided the individuals and environment where he had previously used drugs 
and alcohol. After several months, he contacted his employer and was rehired. He 
continues to attend two or three AA meetings each week. He has not consumed alcohol 
or used illegal drugs since December 2014.7 
 
 Applicant again sought substance abuse treatment in February 2016 for 
additional support and counseling. He was diagnosed with alcohol and drug 
dependence. He attributes his drinking to having been sexually abused as an 
adolescent and keeping his abuse a secret until December 2014.8 
 
 Applicant’s several performance reviews and a certificate establish that he is 
well-regarded by his supervisors. His current supervisor provided a letter of support 
acknowledging Applicant’s past alcohol problems, his efforts to change his 
circumstances and maintain his sobriety, and his favorable work performance. Letters of 
support from Applciant’s pastor, supervisor, and AA sponsor praise his character and 
his efforts to remain sober. Applicant’s mental health counselor indicates that he has 
been in counseling since April 2016, is on psychiatric medication, has quit smoking, 
regularly attends AA meetings, and has been sober since December 2014.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Tr. 49, 52, 53, 68 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 63 
 
8 Tr. 59, 62, 78, 81; GE 7 (diagnoses made by licensed clinical mental health counselor at treatment 
facility). 
 
9 AE A-D. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 
F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from about 1978 to at least December 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he 
attended alcohol treatment and was diagnosed with alcohol dependence (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. 
and 1.e.); that he had multiple alcohol-related convictions (SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h.); 
that he relapsed and that his alcohol use contributed to his cocaine use (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 
and 1.c.). 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The evidence raises two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence . . . .; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
  
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol consumption, relapses, diagnoses of alcohol dependence, 
and OUI convictions establish AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(e), and 22(f).11 The burden 
thereby shifts to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigation condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the Government. The following mitigating conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008) (AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) “contemplate a broad 
rand of providers who by education and by position, are qualified to diagnosis and treat alcohol 
dependence and other substance abuse disorders.”) 
 
6 
 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 23(a), the first prong of this mitigating condition (“so much time has 
passed”) focuses on the recency of the conduct. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the evidence. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has 
passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” 
 
Applicant has abstained from alcohol for over two years, which is a “significant 
period of time.” Compared with the over 30 years of alcohol abuse, treatment, and 
relapse, this two-year period of abstinence is relatively brief. Furthermore, he relapsed 
following a similar period of abstinence between 1992 and 1995. Although Applicant has 
taken positive steps to change his environment and implement a support structure, it is 
simply too early to conclude that such problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does 
not apply. 
 
Applicant has acknowledged his alcohol problem and taken positive steps in 
support of his sobriety – his voluntary attendance and active involvement at AA 
meetings, his disclosures about his past sexual abuse, his relocation, and his mental 
health counseling and medication. Although his two years of sobriety is a significant 
period of time, his 30-year history of alcohol abuse and relapses after lengthy period of 
abstinence prevent me from concluding that he has established a pattern of abstinence 
at this time.  AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has attended mental health counseling with a licensed clinical mental 
health counselor since April 2016. The counselor did not provide a favorable prognosis 
or assessment but did corroborate Applicant’s actions in support of his sobriety. 
Because Applicant has not successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or 
rehabilitation since his last relapse in 2012, AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply. 
 
After decades of alcohol abuse and relapses, Applicant actively pursued and 
implemented changes in his life in support of his sobriety. His support structure includes 
his co-workers, his family, fellow church members, his therapist, and his AA sponsor. 
He is on the right course to maintain his sobriety, yet it is too early to conclude that he 
has mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
7 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(b): testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia;  
 
AG ¶ 25(e): evaluation of drug abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; and  
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant illegally used and purchased illegal drugs, notably cocaine, after 
becoming an adult. His cocaine use occurred while he possessed a security clearance, 
and he tested positive for cocaine in June 2011. He was diagnosed with cocaine 
dependence by qualifying medical professionals at treatment facilities in 2011 and 2016. 
Thus, AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), 25 (e), and 25(g) apply. 
  
The Government established a case for disqualification. Accordingly, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.12 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.13 The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
                                                          
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Like AG ¶ 23(a), the AG ¶ 26(a) analysis includes recency, changes 
circumstances, and reform and rehabilitation, but in the context of drug involvement. 
Applicant’s admitted cocaine use occurred about weekly for two and a half years, while 
he was employed by a DOD contractor and after he had been granted a DOD Secret 
clearance. Such conduct not only was illegal and violated DOD policies, but it also 
represented a breach of trust bestowed upon those entrusted with safeguarding 
classified information. Although Applicant has taken steps to remove himself from the 
environment wherein he used drugs in the past, his frequent drug use while possessing 
a security clearance casts doubts on his reliability and judgment, AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply.    
 
 Applicant has abstained from illegal drug use for over two years, and he no 
longer associates with individuals with whom he had previously used illegal drugs. He 
expressed an intent to cease any further illegal drug use. Because Applicant has 
changed his environment and no longer associated with drug-using associates, AG ¶ 
26(b) applies.   
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s expressed intent to cease further illegal drug use, his 
weekly cocaine use for about two years while possessing a security clearance violated 
federal and state laws and DOD policies for those entrusted with access to classified 
information. Therefore, I find that drug involvement concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline G, Guideline H, and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) 
in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a longtime employee of a DOD contractor, and he is highly regarded 
by his supervisor and co-workers. He has taken positive steps in support of his sobriety, 
though it remains too soon to conclude that alcohol problems will not recur. His frequent 
cocaine use while possessing a security clearance was a significant breach of trust that 
continues to cast doubt on his reliability and good judgment. As a result, the totality of 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant did not mitigate the 
alcohol consumption and drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h.   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.d.:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
