KEYWORD:  Guideline E
DIGEST:  The disqualifying conditions listed under each guideline are illustrative only, not
exhaustive and exclusive.  They provide an analytical framework for decision-making but are not
to be applied in the strict manner required of criminal statutes.  Indeed, it is not anomalous for a
Judge to conclude that none of the listed disqualifying conditions strictly apply yet nevertheless
conclude that an applicant’s conduct raises concerns under the guideline at issue.  A Judge must
bring common sense to his decision making and must place national security over other
competing considerations.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO:  14-03701.a1
DATE:  04/12/2017
DATE:  April 12, 2017
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03701
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James D. DelSordo, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 6, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January
26, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
his conduct raised Guideline E security concerns and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He served in the U.S. military from 1997 until
2012, rising to the grade of E-6.  In 2011, Applicant participated in a hazing incident with five other
members, in which the victim was stripped naked, restrained, photographed, and assaulted, including
an indecent assault in which one of the assailants placed his genitals on the victim’s forehead.  At
the time of the incident, Applicant was 31 years old and had been in the military for 13 years.  He
had received yearly training on the military’s policies forbidding hazing, sexual harassment, sexual
misconduct, and the misuse of alcohol.  Applicant knew that hazing was illegal.
As a consequence of his misconduct, Applicant was brought to a summary court-martial,
where he pled guilty to violating a general order (hazing), indecent acts, and assault consummated
by a battery.  After his conviction, the military administratively discharged Applicant under Other
Than Honorable Conditions.  Between the time of the incident and his discharge in 2012, Applicant
continued to perform his duties.  The military did not revoke his security clearance.
Applicant had no other infractions or problems with the law after this incident.  His current
supervisor commended his duty performance and characterized him as reliable and trustworthy.  His
commanding officer at the time of his misconduct, who is now an 0-6, stated that Applicant was an
outstanding military member.  He considers Applicant to be trustworthy and able properly to handle
classified information.  He stated that Applicant has paid for his mistake.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s misconduct satisfies the statement of concern under
Guideline E1 and disqualifying condition 16(d).2  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the
Judge noted his age and rank at the time of the offense as well as the circumstances underlying it. 
He cited to evidence that Applicant engaged in his misconduct despite regular training regarding the
military’s ban on hazing.  He also noted that at the time of the incident Applicant was in a position
of leadership, responsible for the care of those serving under him and for the enforcement of rules
and regulations.  Though acknowledging the positive evidence that Applicant submitted, the Judge
concluded that abuse of a fellow military member that occurred over a 60 to 90 minute period and
that constituted serious criminal misconduct precluded a favorable decision.
1 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15 
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(d).
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s application of disqualifying condition 16(d).   He contends
that none of the criteria set forth in this subparagraph have been satisfied.
We note first of all that the Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proved conduct
under any of the guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-02903 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017).  In this case, Applicant admitted each allegation set forth
in the SOR, thereby giving rise to this presumption.  Moreover, the disqualifying conditions listed
under each guideline are illustrative only, not exhaustive and exclusive.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No.
12-01698 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014).  They provide an analytical framework for decision-making
but are not to be applied in the strict manner required of criminal statutes.  Indeed, it is not
anomalous for a Judge to conclude that none of the listed disqualifying conditions strictly apply yet
nevertheless conclude that an applicant’s conduct raises concerns under the guideline at issue.  A
Judge must bring common sense to his decision making and must place national security over other
competing considerations.  Id.
Disqualifying condition 16(d) provides as follows:
[C]redible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.  This
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . disruptive, violent, or other
inappropriate behavior in the workplace[.]  
Applicant argues that this condition does not apply because, among other things, he was not
on duty at the time of the offense, as a consequence of which his acts did not occur in the workplace. 
However, Applicant was a member of the U.S. military in an area subject to military command and
control.  Applicant and his fellow service members could have been required to perform military
operations at a moment’s notice, and distinctions between on-duty and off-duty conduct have little
purchase under the kind of circumstances that routinely confront members of the armed forces. 
Moreover, Applicant was expected to enforce standards irrespective of duty status, a requirement
of which he was aware, and failed to do so.  The seriousness of his infraction can be gauged by his
receipt of an Other than Honorable Conditions discharge.  Given the totality of the evidence, we find
no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s violent conduct raised serious questions
about his willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  In particular, we find no reason to
disturb the Judge’s conclusion that 16(d) provides a suitable framework for addressing the essential
nature of Applicant’s security-significant conduct.  We resolve this assignment of error adversely
to Applicant.3
3We also note, as stated above, that the Judge cited to the Guideline E statement of concern:  “Conduct
involving questionable judgment . . . or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  This language captures
In challenging the Judge’s mitigation analysis, Applicant cites to his otherwise clean
disciplinary record and to the favorable opinions of his supervisor and his former commander.  The
Judge made findings about these matters.  However, given the seriousness of his misconduct,
Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge weighed the record evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14,
2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the disqualifying conditions and the mitigating conditions.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Applicant’s misconduct in hazing a military member.  
