 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05768 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial concerns. Eligibility for a public trust position 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
February 24, 2014. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) on December 15, 2014, detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known as 
a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Directive 5200.2R, Personnel Security 
Regulations (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 23, 2015, and included a letter of 
explanation. He elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing 
in an email dated February 17, 2016. The Government’s written brief with supporting 
documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by 
Department Counsel on May 9, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections to the proposed evidence, including a summarized personal 
subject interview, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on May 20, 2016, but did not submit any 
additional evidence nor did he assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on March 24, 2017. Applicant remained sponsored for a 
trustworthiness determination by his employer. The Government’s exhibits included in the 
FORM (Items 1 through 6) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2014. He is a high school graduate and is attending college. 
He has been married since 2001 and has three children and a stepchild. He served in the 
U.S. Army from 2001 to 2011, and was honorably discharged. He was unemployed from 
September 2013 to February 2014, and fell behind on debts. In addition, he fell behind 
on a mortgage on a home he owned when his tenants left unexpectedly. He claims he 
was generally unaware of his delinquent debts because his spouse handled the family 
finances. 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied 
the remaining debts. The SOR debts are supported by credit reports evidence in the 
record. In addition, the May 2016 credit report discloses five additional debts totaling over 
$11,000, not included in the SOR. Applicant provided a partial credit report with his 
answer to the SOR, showing the SOR ¶ 1.c mortgage debt is no longer delinquent. He 
has not shown documentary evidence that the remaining debts have been satisfied or 
were otherwise appropriately addressed, despite his assertions. 
 
There is no evidence of financial counseling or other assistance with debts, except 
that Applicant used a government program to reduce his mortgage payments. 
 
Policies 
 
  Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
3 
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems that largely remain unresolved. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control: and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial problems 
have been resolved. He suffered a financial impact from a period of unemployment and 
loss of rental income, but he has not shown sufficient evidence that he has satisfied three 
of the four debts, or that they are otherwise resolved. Except for paying the home 
mortgage delinquency, the remaining SOR debts are not resolved. 
 
 Applicant has not demonstrated that he has gained control of his financial 
situation, and his overall efforts to address three of the four SOR debts is unsupported by 
the evidence. He has had a steady work history since 2014, yet has not shown 
satisfactory efforts to address the unresolved SOR debts, nor has he shown that his 
current financial status is sound and the likelihood of addition financial problems is 
reduced. There is no evidence of financial counseling or assistance with resolution of 
debts except for the mortgage debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. His history of financial problems 
continues to cast doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Overall, with the exception of SOR ¶ 1.c, I find that the financial considerations concerns 
have not been mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public 
trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
5 
 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. The unresolved SOR 
debts along with additional delinquencies noted in his 2016 credit report, cast doubts on 
his overall financial responsibility and ability to meet financial obligations in the future. I 
find that the financial considerations have not been mitigated. I continue to have questions 
and concerns about his overall ability and willingness to meet his financial responsibilities. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
  Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
