 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01287 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the psychological conditions trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E 
(personal conduct) and I (psychological conditions). The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 19, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 31, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. 
 
2 
Applicant received the FORM on April 22, 2016. He responded with a letter that I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 
2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted in 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is seeking eligibility to hold a public trust position. 
He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 1993. He attended graduate school, 
but it does not appear that he obtained a post-graduate degree. The most recent 
information available indicated that he had never married and he had no children.1 
 
 In 2008, Applicant sent a letter to his doctor with copies to the county sheriff and 
the FBI. He provided a copy of a computerized tomography (CT) scan of his head that 
was taken in 2007. The CT included a one-page report that indicated Applicant’s history 
as: “36-year-old patient with visual and auditory hallucinations.” The report concluded: 
“negative CT examination of the brain without contrast.” Applicant wrote that the 
medical-imaging personnel found nothing pathologically wrong in the CT scan, but 
Applicant saw non-pathological pieces in the scan, which he concluded related to a 
neural network, with apparent monitoring of his thoughts and possibly his vision. He 
identified the components as a radio antenna, a camera behind the iris, and audio 
equipment. He felt that his eyes may have been replaced with a different set of eyes.2 
 
 Additional complaints in the letters included that there may have been an acid-
containing substance being emitted into his nose through his head that, if left untreated 
by acid-reducing medication, caused auditory and visual hallucinations. He felt that 
individuals may have been pointing x-ray lasers or microwave lasers at him through his 
walls. He wrote that he was frequently being followed, and that certain people were 
“emitting an acid-like substance in public areas from their hands in their pockets or with 
use of cell phones.” He felt their vehicles were “emitting acid-containing substances 
through their vehicle’s exhaust.” He felt that his canned food appeared to have been 
irradiated, and when he tapped on the cans, the sounds mirrored words such as “hate 
this country.”3 
 
Applicant was evaluated by a licensed psychologist at the DOD’s request in 
November 2014. He acknowledged that he had hallucinations, which he believed were 
related to the implants in his head. He believed that his food could be tainted by toxins 
and radioactivity. He reported that he got rid of the antennas and batteries in his house, 
which had greatly reduced his concerns about the implants.4 The psychologist’s 
pertinent diagnostic impressions were: 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Items 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
AXIS I: 297.10 Delusional Disorder, 297.1 (Somatic and Persecutory 
Type) 
 
AXIS V: GAF=655 
 
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text 
Revision (DSM-IV-TR), subtypes delusional disorders by the predominant delusional 
theme:  
 
Persecutory Type. This subtype applies when the central theme of the 
delusion involves the person’s belief that he or she is being conspired 
against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously 
maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small 
slights may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. 
The focus of the delusion is often on some injustice that must be remedied 
by legal action (“querulous paranoia”), and the affected person may 
engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by appeal to the courts 
and other government agencies. Individuals with persecutory delusions 
are often resentful and angry and may resort to violence against those 
they believe are hurting them. 
 
Somatic Type. This subtype applies when the central theme of the 
delusion involves bodily functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can 
occur in several forms. Most common are the person’s conviction that he 
or she emits a foul odor from the skin, mouth, rectum, or vagina; that there 
is an infestation of insects on or in the skin; that there is an internal 
parasite; that certain parts of the body are definitely (contrary to all 
evidence) misshapen or ugly; or that parts of the body (e.g., the large 
intestine) are not functioning.  
 
The Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scale ranges from 1 to 100. It is 
used to show psychological, social, and occupational functioning. A number between 60 
and 70, with the lower number more severe, indicates: 
 
Some mild symptoms (e.g., depressed mood and mild insomnia) OR 
some difficulty in social, occupational, or school functioning (e,g., 
occasional truancy, or theft within the household), but generally 
functioning pretty well, has some meaningful interpersonal 
relationships. (emphasis in original) 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Item 6. The psychologist used the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, 
Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). The DSM-IV-TR has been replaced by the DSM-5. There are no significant 
differences in how the two describe delusional disorders or the somatic and persecutory subtypes. 
 
4 
The psychologist summarized:  
 
[Applicant] has a history of somatic and persecutory delusions that have 
spanned the last twelve years. There are no indications of schizophrenic-
type behavior. He denies prominent auditory or visual hallucinations. 
There were no indications of disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, 
or negative symptoms of schizophrenia during the evaluation. Although he 
has had these delusions for a period of time, they have had minimal 
impact on his occupational functioning and the impact that they have on 
his social functioning appears to be diminishing. There were no indications 
that these delusions are the result of substance use, medication, or a 
general medical condition. . . . 
 
After reviewing the adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility for 
access to classified information; it is my belief that [Applicant’s] disorder 
does and will continue to interfere with his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. [Applicant] is suffering from somatic and persecutory 
delusions. He has had this problem for a number of years. It is considered 
a chronic condition and is unlikely to remit. The conventional treatment for 
a delusional disorder is psychotropic medication. [Applicant] has tried 
medication on at least one occasion. He reported that the medication 
made his condition worse. For individuals with somatic delusions, the side 
effects of psychotropic medication can have this effect. [Applicant] has 
chosen not to follow through with treatment to determine if there is a 
different medication that he might be able to tolerate and benefit from. It is 
also unlikely that individual psychotherapy would benefit him, given his 
certainty that what he is experiencing is real. Finally, there are incidences 
where individuals with this diagnosis decompensate when under stress. 
As such, it is possible that dealing with classified information would 
exacerbate his condition, causing him to be more bizarre and increasingly 
unreliable.6 
 
 Applicant disputes some of the facts in the report, such as that he was 
hospitalized in 2008 and that he was arrested in 2002 and 2004 for driving under the 
influence of alcohol. He stated that he was hospitalized in 2002, not 2008. He admitted 
to being arrested in 2004, but “he was not shown to be under the influence of alcohol. 
[He] only accepted guilt to charges of that offense in order to minimize expenses from 
further proceedings in a court of law.” He stated that he “was not arrested in 2002.” It 
appears that he is correct that he was not arrested in 2002; he was actually arrested in 
2000.7  
                                                          
6 Item 6. The psychologist treated the evaluation as if Applicant was applying for a security clearance, 
when he is applying for a public trust positon. The adjudicative guidelines for both are the same. 
However, the stress of “dealing with classified information” may be greater than the stress of dealing with 
sensitive information. I have given little weight to the last sentence in the conclusion. 
7 Items 1-3. Applicant’s arrests were not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility, when determining the 
applicability of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
5 
 Applicant wrote in his response to the SOR that the “[a]ntennas in the proximity 
of [him] have not affected his judgement, reliability, or trustworthiness, [and that his] 
yearly job performance reviews reflect this.” In his response to the FORM, he wrote that 
he provided x-rays from 2006 that “prove that there were objects shown to be implanted 
in [his] body.” He also disagreed with the psychologist’s conclusion, stating: 
 
Applicant has acquired all of the medical and health support he has 
needed prior to the last 7 years, has overcome the emotional instability 
pertaining to his mother’s sickness and death in 2001-2002, is controlling 
any symptoms of the type of Delusional Disorder with over-the-counter 
health supplements, and has not exhibited any bizarre or unreliable 
behavior in recent years.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally provided false information on his 
December 2012 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), during two 
background interviews in 2013, and in his response to interrogatories when he did not 
report psychiatric treatment “in approximately 2005,” and his treatment and 
hospitalization in 2008. Applicant disclosed derogatory matters in his SF 86 and during 
his interviews, including his two DUI arrests. He convincingly stated that the 
hospitalization was in 2002, not 2008, and therefore did not have to be reported as 
beyond the seven-year window. The 2008 timeline was apparently taken from the 
psychologist’s report. I note that in 2008, Applicant was not living in the city where he 
was hospitalized, but he was in 2002. Applicant denied being treated in 2005, and 
“approximately 2005” may have been outside the reporting window.8 There is 
insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant intentionally provided false information 
during any of the occasions.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
8 Items 1-3. 
 
6 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
The trustworthiness concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 28. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
 
7 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; and 
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. 
 
Applicant’s behavior was emotionally unstable and included delusions and 
hallucinations. A psychologist provided a diagnostic impression of delusional disorder, 
somatic and persecutory type, and that the “disorder does and will continue to interfere 
with his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.” AG ¶¶ 28(a) and 28(b) are 
applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 29 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
 Applicant is gainfully employed, and the psychologist noted: “Although he has 
had these delusions for a period of time, they have had minimal impact on his 
occupational functioning and the impact that they have on his social functioning appears 
to be diminishing.”  
 
 Nonetheless, I have significant unresolved concerns. The 2008 letter to the FBI 
was troubling and consistent with the psychologist’s diagnostic impression of delusional 
disorder, somatic and persecutory type, as described in the DSM-IV-TR. While 
Applicant denied hallucinations in the last several years, there is no indication that he 
does not still believe in the delusions. None of the above mitigating conditions, 
 
8 
individually or collectively, are sufficient to alleviate psychological conditions security 
concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
provided false information on his SF 86, during two background interviews in 2013, and 
in his response to interrogatories. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
through 2.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is suffering from delusions. The psychologist wrote that “[a]lthough he 
has had these delusions for a period of time, they have had minimal impact on his 
occupational functioning and the impact that they have on his social functioning appears 
to be diminishing.” That is promising, but while the delusions persist, he is not a suitable 
candidate for a public trust position.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but he did 
not mitigate the psychological conditions trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
