 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05943 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 1, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on January 20, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on February 10, 2016. He responded with documents that I have 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on 
November 2, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE 1 are 
admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He has an associate’s degree, which was awarded in 
1993. He is married with three adult children.1 
 
Applicant was terminated from a job in September 2009 following an 
investigation into a complaint by a subordinate that Applicant made unwanted advances 
toward her. Applicant described a friendly relationship with the subordinate. He denied 
making any advances toward the subordinate.2 
 
In about 2009, Applicant sought counseling from a psychologist or a psychiatrist. 
He was treated by the doctor for about a year for what Applicant described as 
depression, and he was prescribed an antidepressant.3 In 2010 or 2011, Applicant 
voluntarily admitted himself into a hospital at what he described as the hospital’s 
psychiatric ward. He spent three days in the hospital.4 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2013. Under Section 13A – Employment Activities, he reported the job that 
ended in September 2009. He intentionally provided false information when he wrote 
the reason for leaving the job as: “reduction in force.” Applicant also intentionally 
provided false information when he answered “no” to the following question: 
 
For this employment have any of the following happened to you in the 
last seven (7) years? 
 
 Fired 
 Quit after being told you would be fired 
 Left by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of 
misconduct 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4; AE 1. 
 
2 Items 2-4. 
 
3 Applicant stated the doctor was a psychologist, but a psychologist cannot prescribe medication. It is 
unclear whether the doctor was a psychiatrist who prescribed the medication or a psychologist, and the 
medication was prescribed by another doctor.  
 
4 Items 2, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 Left by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance5 
 
Section 13C – Employment Record of the SF 86 asked similar questions to the 
above, except it asked: “Have any of the following happened to you in the last seven 
(7) years at employment activities that you have not previously listed? (If ‘Yes’, you will 
be required to add an additional employment in Section 13A.” (italicized emphasis 
added) Since any issues that would have required a positive response occurred at 
previously listed employment, Applicant correctly answered “no” to this specific 
question.6 
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information when he answered “no” to the 
following question under Section 21 – Psychological and Emotional Health:  
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you consulted with a health care professional 
regarding an emotional or mental health condition or were you hospitalized for 
such a condition? Answer ‘No’ if the counseling was for any of the following 
reasons and was not court-ordered: 
 
 strictly marital, family, grief not related to violence by you; or 
 strictly related to adjustments from service in a military combat 
environment. 
 
Please respond to this question with the following additional instruction: 
Victims of sexual assault who have consulted with a health care 
professional regarding an emotional or mental health condition during this 
period strictly in relation to the sexual assault are instructed to answer 
‘No.’7 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2014. He 
informed the investigator of his mental-health counseling. He stated that he 
inadvertently answered “no” to Section 21 of the SF 86. He stated that he was 
embarrassed to list his mental-health counseling, but the mental-health counseling 
could not be used to coerce, influence, or blackmail him. He did not correct the 
information on the SF 86 about why he left the job in September 2009. He told the 
investigator that he had never been counseled, there was no employee misconduct, and 
he left all employment under favorable circumstances.8 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3. The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified these questions. Any matter that was not 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used to assess Applicant’s 
credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
6 Item 3. 
 
7 Items 2-4. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant was interviewed again in September 2014 to specifically ask him about 
the circumstances surrounding the job that ended in September 2009. He admitted that 
he was terminated from the job because of the allegations made by the subordinate. He 
also admitted that he was untruthful on the SF 86 and during his earlier interview. 
Applicant stated that he falsified the information because he did not want to be 
disqualified based solely on his mental health.9 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he “falsified the information 
because [he] believed it would keep [him] from getting a job.” He further wrote: 
 
Even with the statements by the DOD saying that it would not necessarily keep 
me from gaining a clearance, the circumstances regarding my dismissal from my 
employer and my subsequent voluntary hospitalization would, in my mind, keep 
me from gaining the job. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he made a mistake and that he would accept the 
consequences of his actions. He concluded: 
 
I hope for a positive outcome, I wish to continue my work in support of the [U.S. 
military overseas]. I have taken and continue to take difficult yet necessary steps 
to improve myself because it is important to me to keep trying to improve. I am 
not perfect, I stumble and I ask consideration of this. 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance, dedication to his family, patriotism, community spirit, generosity, 
honesty, diligence, maturity, professionalism, work ethic, loyalty, strong moral character, 
and integrity.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
9 Item 4. 
 
10 AE 1. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that Applicant intentionally falsified Section 13C of the SF 86. 
However, any adverse information about his employment was required to be placed in 
Section 13A, not 13C. His answer to 13C was correct. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information on the SF 86 when he 
answered “no” to the psychological and emotional-health questions. AG ¶ 16(a) is 
applicable to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Applicant deliberately provided false information during his April 2014 
background interview when he did not inform the investigator about why he left the job 
in September 2009 and he stated that he left all employment under favorable 
circumstances. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleged that Applicant was terminated in January 2009 following an 
investigation into a subordinate’s complaints of unwanted advances. The investigation 
was not placed in evidence. Applicant was terminated, but there is insufficient evidence 
to determine that he committed the alleged acts. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged that after his hospitalization in 2010 or 2011, Applicant failed 
to follow the recommendation “to seek aftercare with continuing medication and mental 
health counseling.” There is insufficient evidence to support this allegation. SOR ¶ 1.e is 
concluded for Applicant.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 Applicant intentionally provided false information on the SF 86. When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in April 2014, he corrected the mental-
health information, but he lied to the investigator about his job termination. He revealed 
that information in September 2014 only when specifically confronted with it. There are 
no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant stated that he 
falsified the information on his SF 86 because he did not want to be disqualified based 
solely on his mental health. He is not disqualified for a security clearance because of his 
mental health. He is disqualified for lying on the SF 86 and during his background 
interview.   
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
