 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06714 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (China). In 2002, when he 
was 23 years old, he entered the United States. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2006. He married a Chinese citizen in 2009, and she became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2014. His wife has frequent contact with her immediate relatives, who are citizens 
and residents of China. Applicant has an uncle who worked as a liaison at the Chinese 
embassy in the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
Access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 26, 2013. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on July 10, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).1 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant answered the SOR on August 6, 2015, and initially requested a decision 
based on the written record. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
March 15, 2016, who issued a decision that was later vacated. Subsequently, Applicant 
requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to me on October 12, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
20, 2016, scheduling a hearing for November 2, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). GE 2 is a 
request for administrative notice concerning the government of China. GE 3 was the 
Government’s discovery letter. Applicant testified and submitted two exhibits (AE) 1 
(comprised of Tabs A through H), and AE 2 (a request for administrative notice 
concerning China). All exhibits were admitted into the record as evidence without 
objections, except for GE 2 and AE 2, which were admitted for the limited purpose of 
taking administrative notice. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 9, 
2016. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to correct the misspelling of Applicant’s first name in 
the SOR. The correct spelling of his first name is “Daqing.” Without objections, I 
corrected the SOR accordingly. (Tr. 8-9)  
 
The file on this case contains a prior decision issued by other DOHA 
administrative judge that was later vacated. I gave no weight to the prior decision or to 
any documents in the file that were not admitted as evidence during my hearing. 
 
Applicant, through counsel, requested an expedited hearing. At the hearing, 
Applicant’s counsel indicated he had sufficient time to prepare and was ready to 
proceed. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15-day advanced notice of the 
hearing. (Tr. 7) 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant requested I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the government of China. (GE 3 and AE 2) There were no objections, and I 
took administrative notice as requested. The noted facts are incorporated in my findings 
of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and submitted evidence 
in mitigation and extenuation. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into my findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior consultant (software engineer). He has worked 
for federal contractors since 2007. He received a clearance in 2008, which he has held 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
continuously to present. Applicant was hired by his current employer and clearance 
sponsor in 2012. 
 
Applicant was born in China. At age 8, in 1988, he immigrated with his parents to 
Canada where he was raised and educated. He attended schools in Canada, where he 
received a bachelor’s degree. He became a naturalized Canadian citizen in 1991. 
Applicant entered the United States in 2002, pursuant to a student visa, seeking a 
master’s degree that he completed in 2004. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2006. In his 2013 SCA, Applicant stated that he was a dual citizen of Canada and the 
United States, but was in the process of renouncing his Canadian citizenship. (2013 
SCA, Section 10 Dual-Multiple Citizenship Information). 
 
Applicant’s parents were born, raised, and educated in China. They immigrated 
to Canada in 1988, and became Canadian citizens. Applicant’s parents have been 
residents in the United States for over 10 years and both are now naturalized U.S. 
citizens. 
 
Applicant’s wife was born, raised, and educated in China. She entered the United 
States in 2004. They married in 2009, and have two young children. She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014.  
 
Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States. As a software engineer, 
he earns $100,000 a year. His wife is also employed and her income is $130,000 a 
year. They have combined bank savings of about $40,000. Applicant denied having any 
financial or property investments in China. His wife has a bank account in China with 
about $10,000. He testified the bank account was funded with their wedding gifts. He 
denied contributing money to that account or having any control over it. She uses the 
account to cover medical and living expenses for her parents in China. He believes she 
probably will close the account when her parents pass away. Applicant testified that 
neither he nor his wife intend to return to live in China. 
 
Applicant visited China in 2006, 2008, and 2010. During these trips, he visited his 
grandparents, extended relatives, and his parents-in-law. (Tr. 40) Applicant’s parents-in-
law, wife’s sibling, and other relatives are residents and citizens of China. His wife 
maintains frequent contact with her relatives in China and they have a close 
relationship. At the time of Applicant’s hearing, his wife was in China visiting her parents 
with their children for a three-week period. (Tr. 43) Her sister is married and has a 
family. Applicant does not know whether her spouse works for the Chinese government 
or is affiliated with the Chinese military.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is retired. She was a German language teacher in a 
Chinese school. His father-in-law is a retired computer engineer. Applicant did not know 
who he worked for, but was certain he had not worked for the Chinese government or 
military. They are both currently collecting pensions from the Chinese government. (Tr. 
41) Applicant claimed his last in-person contact with his in-laws happened in 2014, 
when they came to the United States to visit his children and wife, and stayed in 
Applicant’s home. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s uncle (his father’s younger brother) is a citizen and resident of China. 
Sometime before 2007, his father informed Applicant that his uncle would be working in 
the Chinese embassy in Washington, DC. Between 2007 and 2009, his uncle worked as 
a liaison in the Chinese embassy. Applicant visited with his uncle a few times (he 
described his contacts as infrequent).  
 
Applicant attended a Chinese New Year’s party at the Chinese embassy, and 
attended a baseball game with his uncle and a coworker. Applicant believes his uncle 
was reassigned in 2009 to another Chinese embassy in another country. He also 
believes his uncle is currently retired. Applicant testified he has had no contact with his 
uncle (no personal contact, emails, or telephone calls) since 2009. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of one witness and submitted 
six reference letters. His references included co-workers and friends. The gist of their 
testimony is that Applicant is a valuable employee who makes important contributions to 
his employer. He is considered to be honest, reliable, dedicated, knowledgeable, 
professional, and trustworthy. (AE E, H) His performance evaluations indicate Applicant 
consistently meets expectations and is considered to be a valuable performer. (AE E)  
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning China: The National 
Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as the most aggressive 
collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s intelligence services, 
as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese 
citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider access to 
corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email. 
  
In assessing the military and security developments in China, the U.S. 
Department of Defense has reported that: 
 
• Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing 
and persistent threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat 
will evolve with continuing technological advances in the global information 
environment. 
 
• China uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that 
violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security and 
export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials not 
readily obtainable through commercial means or academia. 
 
• China is using its computer network exploitation (CNE) capability to support 
intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. The 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
information targeted could potentially be used to benefit China’s defense 
industry, high technology, policymaker interest in U.S. leadership thinking on 
key China issues, and military planners building a picture of U.S. defense 
networks, logistics, and related military capabilities that could be exploited 
during a crisis. 
 
• China uses state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase 
the level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, 
development, and acquisition. 
 
• The organizational network of China’s military-industrial complex is such that 
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use 
technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research 
and development. 
 
• China has in place a long-term, comprehensive military modernization 
program designed to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-
duration, high-intensity regional conflicts and, as China’s global footprint and 
international interests grow, its military modernization program has become 
progressively more focused on investments for a range of missions beyond 
China’s periphery. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: 
 
• Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-
scale cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a 
range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense contractors, and 
private enterprises. China’s material incentives for continuing this activity are 
immense and unlikely to be altered by small-scale U.S. actions. 
 
• China’s progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to 
China’s substantial and sustained investment in defense research and 
development (R&D). China’s large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual 
property and proprietary information also has allowed China to fill knowledge 
gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
• Since the 1990s, China has promoted civil-military integration to facilitate the 
transfer of commercial technologies for military use. As part of this effort, 
China has encouraged civilian enterprises to participate in military R&D and 
production, sponsored research into dual-use science and technology, and 
developed common military and civilian technical standards. 
 
• With the emergence of a more modern and able domestic defense industrial 
base, China is gradually shifting its focus from purchasing complete foreign 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
systems to procuring foreign military and dual-use subsystems and 
components via open sources, trade, and traditional and nontraditional 
espionage. Among China’s most effective methods used to acquire sensitive 
U.S. technology are cyber espionage, witting and unwitting collection by 
Chinese students, scholars, and scientists; joint ventures; and foreign 
cooperation. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2014, the U.S. 
Department of State reported: 
 
• The Peoples Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in which the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. 
 
• Repression and coercion were routine, particularly against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy and public interest 
issues, ethnic minorities, and law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
• Human rights concerns that were observed during 2014 also included a wide 
variety of human rights violations from extrajudicial killings to various 
violations of due process. 
 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet, usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, 
and personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched 
without knowledge or consent.  
 
The United States has implemented strategies to minimize the theft of intellectual 
property of U.S. companies by China. The United States and China continue to increase 
their dialogue in different areas (economic, military, human rights) improving their 
relations. 
    
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant was born in China. He immigrated with his parents to Canada at age 
eight; became a Canadian citizen; and completed a bachelor’s degree in Canada. He 
entered the United States as a student in 2002. He completed a master’s degree in the 
United States in 2006, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. His parents have 
been living in the United States for more than 10 years, and they are naturalized U.S. 
citizens. 
 
Applicant married his Chinese-born wife in 2009, and they have two children, 
born in the United States. His wife became a naturalized citizen in 2014. Applicant’s in-
laws (wife’s parents and sister) are citizens and residents of China. His wife has 
frequent contact with her parents and relatives in China. At the time of the hearing, she 
was in China with her children visiting her parents. His in-laws (including his wife’s 
sister, spouse, and children) and his uncle are residents and citizens of China. Applicant 
last visited his in-laws and extended family living in China in 2010. His in-laws stayed 
with Applicant in the United States in 2014. 
 
Applicant’s uncle worked as a liaison for the Chinese embassy in Washington, 
DC between 2007 and 2009. He claimed that he no longer maintains contact with his 
extended family and friends in China. He testified he has not had any contact with his 
uncle since he left his post at the Chinese embassy in 2009. His wife is close to her 
parents and sibling living in China. Applicant claimed to have infrequent or no contact 
with his in-laws and extended relatives and friends living in China.2 However, his wife 
maintains frequent contact with her parents and sibling living in China.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection for 
his parents and wife. Through his wife, he also has ties of affection or obligation to her 
immediate family in China. The closeness of the relationship is established by her 
frequent contacts, visits to China, and his in-law’s visits. Additionally, through his father 
he has ties of affection or obligation to his uncle. 
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of China create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help his relatives, who live in China. For example, if intelligence agents or government 
officials in China wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
his relatives and friends residing in China. Applicant would then be subject to coercion 
through his relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
An applicant’s possession of close family ties with their family living in a foreign 
country are not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China with the 
United States, and China’s “history of conducting espionage against the United States 
puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant” to demonstrate that his relationships with 
family members living in China do not pose a security risk. See ISCR Case No. 12-
04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013). Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist relatives living in China.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
relatives living in China. Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
the future. Applicant’s relationships with family members living in China create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist relatives in China by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts or relationships with family living in China, raising the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established 
and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant, directly or through his 
wife, has frequent contact with his in-laws who are citizens and residents of China. 
Applicant has close contact with his wife and her parents. He claimed his contacts with 
his in-laws living in China are infrequent; however, his wife continues to have contacts 
with her relatives in China.  
 
Applicant’s (directly or through his wife and his parents) connections to family 
living in China are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, 
those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), 
and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
relationships with family living in China] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s relationship 
with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created 
by his relationships with family living in China.  
 
There is no evidence that the Chinese government or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information. While the U.S. Government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, 
Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and 
diplomatic investment in China. Applicant’s family living in China could become potential 
targets of intelligence agents because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and 
Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to 
Applicant’s family living in China. Moreover, his uncle worked as a liaison in the Chinese 
embassy in the United States. That close connection to the Chinese government in 
likely sensitive matters creates a heavier evidentiary burden for Applicant to mitigate the 
foreign influence security concerns raised by that relationship. 
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States and more limited 
connections to China. Notwithstanding, taken together, his and parent’s, and his wife’s 
connections to their family and friends living in China are significant. Security concerns 
are not analyzed in a piecemeal manner. Instead, the overall situation must be 
considered. Applicant’s close relationship to his parents, wife, and in-laws in China, who 
are vulnerable to potential Chinese coercion, outweighs his connections to the United 
States in the security analysis. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B 
are not mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
There are some facts supporting a grant of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He entered the United States in 2002, at age 23, and attended post-
graduate studies. He was awarded a master’s degree in the United States. He claimed 
to have no property or financial investments in China. However, Applicant’s wife has a 
bank account with $10,000 in China. Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2006, 
and his wife in 2014. He has successfully worked for government contractors since 
2007, while holding a clearance. There is no evidence of any security violations or of 
issues of possible security concerns. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.3 
The danger of coercion from the Chinese government or intelligence agents is more 
likely than in many other countries. China competes with the United States militarily, 
diplomatically, and through trade. China has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
military and industrial secrets. 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s in-laws and his parents’ relatives are citizens and residents of 
China. Applicant directly or through his wife has relatives with whom he has close ties of 
affection or obligation who are residents and citizens of China. Applicant has close ties 
of affection and obligation to his parents and wife. “It is not to question Applicant’s 
patriotism to acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case raises the reasonable 
concern that [he] could be placed in a position of having to choose between [his] ties to 
the U.S. and [his] obligations to [his] foreign family members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 
at 5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Chinese 
connections). Applicant should not be placed into a position where Chinese government 
or intelligence officials could coerce his parents, wife (or their relatives in China), or 
Applicant, to attempt to obtain classified information. I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concern. 
Formal Findings 
 Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
