 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02643 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. He resolved over $43,000 in debt through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy before the Government issued the Statement of Reasons (SOR). The record 
does not contain any evidence of ongoing financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2015, the DOD issued a SOR detailing security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on February 2, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on February 11, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me 
on May 24, 2016. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and 5 through 8, without objection. GE 4 is 
excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 4 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with an investigator during his October 2014 background investigation. The interview, 
which contains adverse information, is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM advises Applicant of that fact and further 
cautions him that if he fails to object to the admission of the interview summary in his 
response to the FORM that his failure may be taken as a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that he 
understands the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
establish that he understands the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible and I have not 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 33, has worked for his current employer since 2014. He completed a 
security clearance application, his first, in August 2014. Applicant disclosed that he 
planned to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. He filed the petition in February 
2015, seeking relief from $43,189 in debt. According to the bankruptcy petition, $18,000 
of that amount may have been for a duplicate account. The bankruptcy court discharged 
Applicant’s debts in May 2015. The record does not contain any information about 
Applicant’s finances after the discharge.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”3  
 
The SOR contains one allegation, that Applicant filed for and received 
bankruptcy protection in 2015. The act of filing for bankruptcy protection may suggest 
that an application has financial problems that raise a security concern. Here, Applicant 
sought relief from $43,000 of debt he incurred over nine years. This indicates that 
Applicant experienced a history of financial problems that resulted in an inability to pay 
his creditors, which is disqualifying.4 Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection as a 
legitimate method of resolving his debt, which were discharged five months before the 
SOR issued. Applicant’s financial problems are resolved and the related security 
concerns mitigated.5  
 
Based on the written record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The record does not contain any evidence to 
suggest that Applicant has ongoing financial problems or habits that reflect negatively 
on his current security worthiness.  
 
 
                                                          
3  AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
5 AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
4 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
