KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence. These arguments,
however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
CASENO: 15-01979.a1
DATE: 04/27/2017
DATE: April 27, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01979
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 9, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On February 8, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Gregg A. Cervi denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He is a U.S. citizen by birth
and has no foreign citizenship.  He has worked in a number of overseas locations and has held a
security clearance for more than 30 years.  In 2011, he married his current wife, an Israeli citizen,
whom he met while working in Israel.  She is applying to become a permanent resident of the United
States.  She owns a home in Israel valued at about $120,000.  She has three adult children who are
citizens and residents of Israel.  His wife and stepchildren have completed compulsory military
service in Israel.  He now lives in another foreign country with his wife and maintains regular
contact with his stepchildren.  The record is devoid of substantive background information on
Applicant’s wife and stepchildren, including no detailed information with respect to their Israeli
military service such as dates of service, rank, division in which they served, or military training and
specialty.  Additionally, the record does not show documentary evidence of U.S. permanent
residence applications and their current status.1
Applicant asserts he and his family are law-abiding citizens and do not belong to any group
or organization that may conflict with his personal or professional life.  He stresses he is a loyal U.S.
citizen, but did not include documentary evidence of character or employment performance.
Israel is a close ally of the United States.  It has been identified as a major practitioner of
industrial espionage against U.S. companies.  There have been instances of illegal export, or
attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel.  U.S. and Israel have
disagreed over Israeli sales of U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party countries, including India,
China, and Russia.  Human rights violations have involved Palestinian detainees or Arab Israelis. 
Terrorist suicide bombings are a continuing threat in Israel, and U.S. citizens in Israel are advised
to be cautious.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant connections to Israel raised security concerns under
1 Decision at 3.
Disqualifying Conditions 7(a),2 7(b),3 and 7(e).4  The Israeli citizenship of Applicant’s wife and
stepchildren, some of whom reside in Israel, coupled with their connection to the Israeli military,
establishes a heightened risk.  Applicant has strong ties to Israel through his wife and stepchildren. 
These family ties, coupled with Israel’s record of industrial espionage, preclude a finding that it is
unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government, and the interests of the United States.  Without
additional facts that are not contained in the record, the Judge was not convinced Applicant would
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests.  His indirect interest in the his wife’s home
in Israel has the potential to result in a conflict of interest.  In his whole-person analysis, the Judge
found that, based on the information available, Applicant’s divided loyalties and foreign financial
interests preclude a finding that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the
United States.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence.  For example, he stated
the Judge did not take into consideration that he has a permanent home in the United States, that he
and his wife no longer reside in Israel, and that he intends to move his entire family to the United
States.  These arguments, however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in
a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-04856 at
2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017).   We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant
has cited, but it is neither binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the
Judge’s decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).  Additionally,
we find no basis for concluding the Judge erred in his whole-person analysis.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.”
2 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a) states, “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion[.]” 
3 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(b) states, “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information[.]” 
4 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(e) states, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country,
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign
influence or exploitation[.]” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
