 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06810 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s family contacts and her financial and property interests in the United 
Kingdom (UK) do not create a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation, a 
potential conflict of interest, or an unacceptable security risk. She surrendered her UK 
passport. Considering the relations between the United States and the UK, Applicant 
has mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. On April 10, 2016, the DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C 
(foreign preference) and Guideline B (foreign influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR 
on May 4, 2016, and requested a decision based on the written record.  
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) (adducing the 
evidence in support of the denial), was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated 
May 31, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 9, 2016. She was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant submitted an eight-page response to the FORM 
that was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on July 1, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government presented no evidence concerning the government of the UK 
and its relations with the United States. Because the identity and the character of the 
foreign country at issue and its relationship with the United States is always a concern 
in Guideline B cases (see AG ¶ 6), I took administrative notice (sua sponte) of facts 
about the UK contained on a U.S. Department of State Fact Sheet - U.S. Relations With 
United Kingdom, dated July 20, 2016 (https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3846.htm).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.d, and 2.e. She admitted the 
factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c, and submitted a two-page letter with 
comments to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s SOR 
and FORM response admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old managing partner (self-employed) of a company she 
and her spouse founded. She was born, raised, and educated in the UK, where she 
earned a bachelor’s degree, a master’s degree, and a professional degree (Common 
Professional Examination in Law). She immigrated to the United States in August 2000 
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2014. Applicant married her 
spouse in 1997. He also was born, raised, and educated in the UK, and is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. They have two boys, ages 12 and 10, who were born in the United States. 
 
Between 2001 and 2005, Applicant worked for a private company in the United 
States as an engineering manager. She was unemployed between 2005 and 2012, and 
used the period to raise her children. She has been self-employed as a managing 
partner of her company since April 2012. This is her first SCA.  
 
Applicant disclosed in her 2015 SCA that she was in possession of an UK 
passport, issued to her in 2006, that would not expire until May 2017. Applicant 
revealed that she used her UK passport extensively to travel to the UK and other foreign 
countries. During her interview with a government investigator in April 2015, Applicant 
was in possession of the UK passport, and she offered to give up her UK passport, if 
needed. She was issued a U.S. passport after her naturalization in September 2014. 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant denied, and there is no evidence to the contrary, that she used her UK 
passport after she became a naturalized U.S. citizen and was issued her U.S. passport.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, and in her response to the FORM, Applicant stated 
that sometime after her 2015 interview, she returned her UK passport to the UK. She 
did not submit documentary evidence to corroborate her claim, but indicated she would 
have submitted the documentation if she had been asked for it. Applicant last voted in a 
UK local election in June 2000. She believes she is no longer eligible to vote in UK 
elections. 
 
Applicant, her parents, sister, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of the 
UK. Applicant’s parents are both retired and in their eighties. Her parents-in-law are 
both retired and in their seventies. Applicant’s mother’s most recent employment was 
with the “Inland Revenue Service.” Her father worked for the Bank of England. Her 
sister worked for a primary school. Her mother-in-law worked for a bank before she 
retired. Applicant claimed not to know what her father-in-law’s employment was before 
he retired. Presumably, all of them receive a pension or other benefits from their 
employers or the UK government.  
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 20A (Foreign Activities) of the 2015 SCA, that she 
and her spouse had significant financial interests in the UK, which included UK 
accounts with an estimated value of $981,975 (depository and custodial accounts and 
assets reported to the IRS on Form 8938, Statement of Foreign Financial Assets. In her 
May 2016 answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that the current value of her UK financial 
assets was approximately $623,000. She noted that a significant portion of those assets 
were in retirement accounts that she cannot access until she reaches her retirement 
age. In her June 2016 response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she had reduced 
her financial assets in the UK to $575,000. 
 
Applicant and her spouse purchased a home in the UK in 1997 with an estimated 
value at the time of the purchase of $200,000. Applicant purchased another property in 
1990 with an estimated value at the time of the purchase of $52,000. In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant denied owning a home in the UK. However, she admitted to having 
an interest in a real estate investment property in the UK. There is no information as to 
the current value of the properties.  
 
Applicant submitted documents showing that she and her spouse’s U.S. financial 
assets are about $850,000, and their U.S. property interests have a value of about $2.1 
million. (See response to the FORM) Applicant averred that any financial or proprietary 
interests that she has in the UK are insignificant when compared to her financial and 
proprietary interests in the United States. She also submitted a certificate showing that 
she and her spouse recently formed a domestic limited liability company in her state of 
residency. 
 
Applicant believes that she has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the United States formed over that last 17 years. She and her spouse are raising their 
children in the United States as Americans.  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the United States 
relations with the UK: 
 
The United States has no closer ally than the United Kingdom, and British 
foreign policy emphasizes close coordination with the United States. 
Bilateral cooperation reflects the common language, ideals, and 
democratic practices of the two nations. Relations were strengthened by 
the United Kingdom's alliance with the United States during both World 
Wars, in the Korean conflict, in the Persian Gulf War, in Operation Iraqi 
Freedom, and in Afghanistan, as well as through its role as a founding 
member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The United 
Kingdom and the United States continually consult on foreign policy issues 
and global problems and share major foreign and security policy 
objectives. 
 
U.S. Department of State Fact Sheet: U.S. Relations with United Kingdom, July 20, 
2016 (https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3846.htm). 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the concerns about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and the UK. She was born, raised, 
and educated in the UK by her UK parents and relatives. She immigrated to the United 
States in 2000, at age 30. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014, and was 
issued a U.S. passport shortly thereafter. She possessed an UK passport before 
immigrating to the United States. There is no evidence to show that Applicant ever used 
her UK passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and receiving her U.S. passport. 
Applicant stated that she returned her UK passport to UK authorities shortly after her 
2015 interview with a government agent. Applicant continues to hold financial and 
proprietary interests in the UK.  
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 10(a) is supported by the 
evidence. If this condition is not mitigated, it would disqualify Applicant from eligibility to 
hold a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
preference:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s concerns raised by her 
possession of an UK passport, and she surrendered the passport to the UK authorities. 
Applicant’s surrendering her UK passport mitigates the security concerns alleged under 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Guideline C. I considered that Applicant could be exercising her UK citizenship to 
protect and maintain her financial and property interests in the UK. Notwithstanding, she 
acquired the financial and property interest before she became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen, and she has been reducing her interests after she was made aware of the 
security concerns. Considering the evidence as a whole, in particular, the lack of 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, I find the Guideline C concerns mitigated.   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying under AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s parents, sister, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of the 
UK. They are all retired and receive retiree pensions. Applicant owns a property interest 
in a house she and her husband purchased in 1997 for about $200,000, and on another 
property purchased in 1990 for about $52,000. Applicant presented no documentary 
evidence about the current value of the two properties she owns in the UK. Applicant’s 
current financial interests in the UK are about $575,000. Applicant believes that her 
financial and property interests in the UK are not substantial when compared to her 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
financial and property interests in the United States. Applicant financial and property 
assets in the United States are valued at close to $3 million.  
 
  The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with her parents, sister, and parents-in-law living in the UK. These contacts 
create a potential conflict of interest between the Applicant’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information and her desire to help her family members in the UK. Additionally, 
Applicant has significant financial and property interests in the UK. 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and the UK. She was born in the 
UK and immigrated to the United States in 2000, at age 30, with her spouse. She 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. Her two sons were born in the United States.  
 
Applicant is deeply rooted in the United States, and believes that there is no 
evidence to show that she has a preference for the UK over the United States. Applicant 
documentary evidence shows that she has substantial financial and property interests in 
the United States, with a value of close to $3 million. Applicant and her husband have 
financial and property interests in the UK with a value of at least $800,000. She 
explained that most of the assets are in retirement accounts that she cannot access 
until she reaches her retirement age.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family members living in the 
UK. Considering the UK’s government and its relationship with the United States, 
Applicant is able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her 
relationships with her relatives who are UK citizens and living in the UK] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant lived in the UK the first 30 years of her life and in 
the United States during the most recent 17 years. Applicant considers the United 
States her home, and she considers herself an American. She has two sons born in the 
United States that she is raising as Americans. Additionally, Applicant has substantial 
financial and property interests in the United States that she believes trump her financial 
and property interests in the UK. Considering the evidence as a whole, in particular, the 
nature and quality of the relations between the United States and the UK, Applicant has 
carried her burden of persuasion and the foreign influence and foreign preference 
security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
