 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04618 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on May 24, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 2, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided no response to the 
 
2 
 
 
FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as GE 1 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings in July 
2004 and March 2006, respectively. He stated that he filed these bankruptcies due to 
the decline in the economy and loss of contracts in his business.1 He admitted 11 of the 
other 13 SOR allegations of delinquent debts, totaling $20,434. Applicant denied SOR ¶ 
1.k, because the creditor and debt were unknown to him. He also denied the delinquent 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o, owed for a parking fine, “until more information is found out 
about this account.”2 In his personal subject interview (PSI) of August 2013, Applicant 
explained that both bankruptcies were dismissed, after he continued to make payments 
to his creditors and consulted with an attorney.3 After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant disclosed some of his financial problems in section 26 of his June 2013 
Questionnaire for National Security Position (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application 
(SCA). Applicant repeatedly stated in his response to the SOR that “I admit to the debt 
owed to (creditor) and will seek to make retribution.”4 Yet, he has produced no 
evidence, such as payment installment plans, receipts, cancelled checks, or 
correspondence with the creditors, to show progress. Nor has he tried to find out more 
about the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k and SOR ¶ 1.o. Yet, these are 
reflected in his 2013 credit bureau report.5  
           .    
  Applicant is 49 years old. He graduated from high school in 1985, and obtained 
his associate’s degree in electrical engineering in 2013. He has been married since 
1992, and he has been employed by a federal contractor since October 2012. He 
reports honorable service in the Navy from 1992 –1999, and a top secret clearance 
while he was on active duty.6 Applicant repeatedly avers that he was unable to pay 
these delinquent debts due to “limited funds.”7 Moreover, in his PSI in August 2013, 
Applicant asserted that he had no medical insurance when his wife and daughter 
                                                          
1 GE 3, Answer to SOR.  
 
2 GE 3, Answer to SOR.  
 
3 GE 5, page 5. 
 
4  GE 3, Answer to SOR.  
 
5 GE 6. 
 
6 GE 2 at page 42. 
 
7 GE 2 at section 26. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
needed medical attention. That resulted in the judgment against him at SOR ¶ 1.i.8 In 
that same interview, Applicant explained that he was self-employed at his own 
construction business, when he lost a large government roads contract in December 
2007. After that, he went out of business in 2010. That was the primary cause of his 
financial problems.9 Further, he has had no financial counseling, and he “plans on 
repaying each financial obligation as funds become available.”10 Applicant has not 
resolved any of his delinquent debts.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
8 GE 2, at page 4. 
 
9 GE 5, at page 6.  
 
10 GE 5, at page 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant admitted to filing the two Chapter 13 bankruptcies that were 
subsequently dismissed. He also either disclosed or admitted to 11 of the remaining 13 
delinquent debts and judgment alleged in the SOR. The two other delinquent debts 
alleged, which he denied, are substantiated in his credit reports. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disclosed many of his delinquent debts in his SCA. He stated his intent 
to make [retribution] payment arrangements over one year ago. But Applicant has not 
followed through on any of this. He provided no documents or evidence to show 
progress on payments, or mitigation regarding the 13 delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. These debts were not discharged in the earlier Chapter 13 bankruptcies filed in 
2004 and 2006. AG ¶ ¶ 20(a), 20 (b) and ¶ 20(c) do not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. He has not met his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:            For Applicant 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.c -1.o:                        Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
     _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
     Administrative Judge 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
