KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not raise an issue of harmful error.  Our jurisdiction is limited to cases in
which the appealing party has asserted that the Judge committed harmful error.  Adverse
decision affirm.  
CASE NO: 15-03061.a1
DATE: 04/06/2017
DATE: April 6, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No.15-03061
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 10, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On January 30, 2017, after considering the record, Administrative
Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 In the Appeal Brief, Applicant raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, she stated that she is appealing to present favorable information that she did not previously
present to the Judge.  She attached documents to her Appeal Brief that constitute new evidence,
which the Appeal Board can neither receive nor consider.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
