KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07294.a1
DATE: 04/19/2017
DATE: April 19, 2017
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07294
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
21, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
February 1, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born in Iraq.  She married a U.S. citizen, moving to this country in the mid-
2000s.  She became a citizen of the U.S. a few years ago.  Applicant’s mother and two siblings are
citizens and residents of Iraq.  Applicant has provided financial support to her mother, including a
gift of $25,000 toward the purchase of a house.  Her mother receives a pension from the Iraqi
government.  Applicant maintains regular contact with her mother.  She has a strained relationship
with one of her siblings.  Another sibling is a government employee, who will eventually be entitled
to a government pension.  Applicant’s speaks with this sibling by phone “several times a week.” 
Decision at 3.
Applicant’s Iraqi relatives are aware of her employment by a U.S. contractor and that she
is assisting the military.  In 2015 Applicant underwent a counter-intelligence security screening. 
She advised that she had concerns about the safety of her relatives in Iraq and that if militant groups
found out about her work with the U.S. her relatives would be in danger.  She stated that she
intended to tell her mother and siblings about her employment situation and instruct them to keep
the information closely guarded.
U.S. citizens in Iraq are at risk of kidnaping and terrorist violence.  The Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant controls a large portion of Iraq.  Anti-U.S. militias may threaten U.S. persons and
companies throughout Iraq.  The country has seen a surge in terrorist attacks, and it is the greatest
terrorist threat globally.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant has regular contact with all three of her Iraqi relatives. 
Moreover, she has provided her mother with financial support.  She noted her findings about terrorist
activity in Iraq and concluded that Applicant’s relatives pose a heightened risk that Applicant could
be subjected to coercion.  The Judge characterized Applicant’s relationship with her family members
as close, noting that she speaks with them regularly.  She also noted Applicant’s concern for her
relatives’ safety should militia forces become aware of Applicant’s work situation.  The Judge found
that Applicant could be subject to a conflict of interest between her obligation to the U.S. and her
concern for her family.
2
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence discussed above.  She also noted
that Applicant has served the U.S. under dangerous conditions.  However, she found Applicant’s
strong family ties in Iraq to pose “an insurmountable burden” should Applicant be forced to choose
between her duties to the U.S. and the welfare of her family.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence, for example that she
has a strained relationship with one of her siblings, that she has a clean security record, etc. 
Regarding the sibling, we note Applicant’s testimony that she is trying to convince her sibling to
move to the U.S.  Tr. at 42.  This supports the Judge’s conclusion that her ties with her sibling are
sufficiently close to raise a security concern.  Despite Applicant’s arguments to the contrary, the
record supports the Judge’s findings and conclusions about Applicant’s relationship with her Iraqi
relatives.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record, nor has she demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017).  Applicant cites to some other Hearing Office
cases that she believes support her effort for a favorable result.  We give these cases due
consideration.  However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or
on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01416 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2017).
    
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed:James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
