 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 15-03988 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Susanna K. Farber, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of her efforts to resolve her 
delinquent debts. Financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated, 
and eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2013, Applicant signed her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) 
On December 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF 
was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails 
access to sensitive information. (HE 2) The DOD CAF recommended referral to an 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
administrative judge to determine whether her access to sensitive information should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On January 16, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and she 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On July 25, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On October 13, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On December 22, 2016, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the hearing 
for January 19, 2017. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, the 
Government provided four exhibits; Applicant offered two exhibits; and all exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection, except Applicant objected to admissibility of 
two credit reports. (Tr. 13-17; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-2)  
 
Applicant contended that only the most recent credit report should be admitted. 
(Tr. 14) Her objection to admissibility was overruled as the two older credit reports show 
a history of Applicant’s finances. Each credit report is a snap shot of the Applicant’s 
finances when the credit report is generated. The credit reports tend to corroborate 
each other as they often show the same debts. Different credit reports may show: 
progress paying down the balance owed on a debt; an increase in delinquent amounts 
owed on debts; transfers of debts; and resolution of debts. More recent credit reports 
are more relevant than older credit reports because the more recent the report the more 
current the financial information will be.  
 
On January 26, 2017, I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.). On January 31, 
2017, Department Counsel provided documentation from Applicant’s Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, which was admitted into evidence without objection. (GE 5) On April 4, 
2017, Applicant provided one exhibit, which was admitted into evidence, and the record 
closed that same day. (Tr. 55; AE 3)     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. She 
also provided explanations and mitigating information. (HE 2) Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a contractor, and she has been employed 
by the same contractor in health-care services for 17 years. (Tr. 18; GE 1) Three years 
ago she moved into a federal-health program. (Tr. 18, 39) In 1976, she received a high 
school diploma. (GE 1) In 1977, she married, and in 1999, she divorced. (GE 1) Her two 
children from her first marriage are ages 32 and 36. (Tr. 38) In 2001, she married. (GE 
1) She has not served in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1) There is no evidence that she 
violated trustworthiness rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal 
drugs.  
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant had financial problems because her mother had a stroke and was in a 
coma for a time; her husband became unemployed in 2010 or 2011; the decline in real 
estate values caused them to be “underwater” on their residence; and her renters left 
her rental property. (Tr. 18-19, 27-29) Her mother passed away in 2012. (Tr. 47; SOR 
response) Applicant said, “I went through a time where I couldn’t work. I was depressed. 
I wanted to die. I didn’t care.” (Tr. 36) She was off from work for three months, and she 
received therapy and medication. (Tr. 36, 48) Her depression was primarily due to grief. 
(Tr. 51) She did not trust anybody because her Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed. 
(Tr. 36) She found her finances difficult to understand and overwhelming. (Tr. 36) She is 
feeling better now, and her husband has found employment. (Tr. 39, 47)    
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are documented in her credit reports, SCA, SOR 
response, hearing transcript, and bankruptcy filings. The status of the eight delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR and Chapter 13 bankruptcy is as follows. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2011, and 
this bankruptcy was dismissed in March 2013. Applicant paid her bankruptcy attorney; 
she and her husband filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy; they were 18 months into the 
plan; and then she was surprised to learn the bankruptcy was dismissed. (Tr. 20) She 
paid $1,400 monthly for a total of $29,881 into her payment plan. (Tr. 34; GE 5) 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in 2011 lists 22 creditors, including 9 debts over 
$5,000 and 3 mortgage debts. (GE 5) She has six debts listed for over $10,000 each. 
(GE 5) Applicant also had a second mortgage for about $82,000; however, Applicant 
was unsuccessful in her attempt to merge the first and second mortgage into a single 
modified loan. (Tr. 32) For her second mortgage, her March 2013 bankruptcy trustee 
report indicated: claim scheduled $89,331; claim asserted and allowed: $82,257; 
principal paid: $0; and interest paid: $0. (GE 5 at 8) She noted the second mortgage 
was on her credit report. (Tr. 33) She is not making payments on the second mortgage. 
(Tr. 34) She provided a September 4, 2016 letter from an attorney indicating the second 
mortgage was not “stripped off” of her home which was a possibility under her Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. (AE 2)2 Accordingly this non-SOR debt is still considered delinquent and 
unresolved.  
 
All of her Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments were applied to two accounts: 
$25,748 was paid to her first mortgage loan of $467,350; and $2,894 was paid to her 
vehicle loan of $11,887. (GE 5 at 8) She hired a specialist to determine why her 
                                            
2See Nolo Website, Baran Bulkat, Getting Rid of Second Mortgages in Chapter 13 (stating 
“Bankruptcy Lien stripping is a Chapter 13 bankruptcy tool that allows people who are upside down 
(meaning your mortgage exceeds the value of your house) on their house to get rid of their junior liens 
such as second or third mortgages. Through a lien strip, the bankruptcy court essentially takes your 
second mortgage (which is a secured debt where the lender can foreclose on your property if you miss 
your payments) and converts it to an unsecured debt (just like a credit card debt) by ordering the lender to 
remove its lien from the property. . . . In most districts, you can only use lien stripping in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. However, if you live in Alabama, Florida, or Georgia, you might be able to remove junior liens 
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.”), http://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/rid-second-mortgage-chapter-13-
bankruptcy.html#. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
bankruptcy was dismissed, and she learned her bankruptcy attorney made about 20 
errors. (Tr. 20) She believed her bankruptcy was dismissed because her attorney made 
mistakes. (Tr. 35) She paid another consultant $175 for advice on her bankruptcy. (Tr. 
20) The bankruptcy documentation shows that Applicant’s counsel made a motion to 
confirm bankruptcy plan, which was denied on December 18, 2012, and Applicant’s 
counsel was supposed to file an amended plan or refile to confirm the plan, which was 
not timely filed with the trustee. The trustee then filed a motion to dismiss the 
bankruptcy, which the judge granted in March 2013. (GE 5) There is no evidence that 
Applicant was made timely aware of the need to file an amended plan. Applicant was 
aware of and disclosed the dismissal of her Chapter 13 bankruptcy on her June 27, 
2013 SCA. (GE 1)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent mortgage debt for $208,203. Applicant’s March 
16, 2016 credit report shows a $465,000 mortgage with an actual payment of $1,429 
and a past due amount of $34,641. (Tr. 44; GE 4 at Item 14) Her March 16, 2016 credit 
report also shows a $202,693 mortgage account with comments, “Loan modified under 
a federal government plan” with a past due amount of $0. (GE 4 at Item 6) Her 
mortgage was delinquent for a time, and then she received a loan modification and 
brought her mortgage to current status. (Tr. 21, 24, 31, 44-45) She said the $208,000 
indicated in SOR ¶ 1.b was a balloon payment scheduled for the end of the loan in 20 
years. (Tr. 21) She presented documentation from the creditor showing she was current 
on her mortgage. (Tr. 22-23)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a mortgage account that went to foreclosure. Applicant paid 
her mortgage for 15 years. Then the renters stopped making payments for about six 
months and eventually moved around 2010 or 2011. (Tr. 19, 29-31, 43) She was unable 
to pay the mortgage, and the mortgage company foreclosed on her rental property in 
2010 or 2011. (Tr. 19, 43) Applicant had not heard anything about owing the creditor, 
and she believed she did not have a deficiency balance on the foreclosure. (Tr. 27, 45)  
 
Applicant acknowledged that she had four delinquent SOR debts, and she did 
not want to contact the creditors because they were mean, and they can “see how 
ignorant or weak or whatever you want to call it” the debtors are, and “if you’re already 
ill and depressed and want to die, are you going to call them again to get beat up 
again?” (Tr. 37; SOR response) The four SOR creditors she did not want to contact are 
as follows: SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a charged-off bank debt for $1,684; SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a 
bank debt placed for collection for $534; SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a bank debt placed for 
collection for $512; and SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a charged-off bank debt for an unspecified 
amount. (Tr. 37)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $9,804. 
Applicant was the victim of identity theft. (Tr. 24) She received a phone bill including 
numerous overseas calls costing thousands of dollars. (Tr. 24) She disputed her 
responsibility for the bill; however, the creditor refused to remove it from her credit 
report. (Tr. 25) Her most recent contact with the creditor was in 2012. (Tr.   
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a charged-off bank debt for $13,310. The debt resulted from a 
time-share contract. (Tr. 25) She asked the creditor to sell their time share. (Tr. 25-26)   
 
Applicant’s annual income is $54,000, and her husband’s annual income is 
$76,000 if he is employed for 12 months. (Tr. 42; AE 3) Sometimes he is only employed 
for three or four months of the year. (Tr. 42)  
 
At her hearing, Applicant said she intended to file a Chapter 7 or 13 bankruptcy. 
(Tr. 26, 40) She is looking for a trustworthy attorney to help with the bankruptcy. (Tr. 27, 
40) She wanted to file her taxes and use her tax refund to hire an attorney. (Tr. 45) She 
is not sure of the difference between a Chapter 7 and a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (Tr. 41) 
She said she did not have any other delinquent debt. (Tr. 49) After her hearing, she 
provided an unsigned Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing. (AE 3) Applicant’s attorney indicated 
the Chapter 7 bankruptcy was filed on March 21, 2017. (AE 3) For unsecured 
nonpriority debts, she listed 16 creditors and debts totaling $53,601. (AE 3) She listed 
secured debts of $484,165, including four vehicles. (AE 3) She did not list the second 
mortgage on her residence on her bankruptcy.      
 
Applicant loves her work. (Tr. 48) She received compliments for her hard work. 
(Tr. 48) She wants to continue her employment. (Tr. 48-49) Her human resources 
director indicated she “has always been an employee in good standing. She has not 
had any performance or attendance issues during her employment with the company. 
[She] has demonstrated she is a trustworthy employee.” (AE 1) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s [eligibility for a public trust position].  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR 
response, SCA, credit reports, and hearing record establish the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some positive 
financial information. Applicant had financial problems because her mother had a 
stroke, she was in a coma for a time, and then she passed away in 2012; her husband 
became unemployed in 2010 or 2011; the decline in real estate values caused them to 
be “underwater” on their residence; her renters left her rental property, and she was 
unable to pay the mortgage on the rental property. Applicant was unable to work for 
three months due to depression and grief. Her bankruptcy attorney failed to file 
necessary documentation, and her Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed in March 
2013. These are circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances.  
 
I have credited Applicant with mitigating the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.g. Applicant did not negligently cause her Chapter 13 bankruptcy to be dismissed. 
She was making her required monthly payments into her Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
Even though her mortgage was delinquent more than $30,000, her mortgage was 
modified and is now current. Her rental property was foreclosed more than five years 
ago, and there is no evidence the creditor is seeking additional funds from Applicant. 
She disputed the telecommunications debt, and due to the magnitude of the debt, I find 
the debt to be unsubstantiated. She received financial counseling and presented a 
budget as part of her draft bankruptcy petition. (AE 3) 
 
Applicant did not establish her good faith in the resolution of her other SOR five 
debts.3 There is insufficient evidence that her $82,000 second mortgage is resolved.4 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
There is no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved several delinquent SOR accounts. While Applicant 
filed for bankruptcy on March 21, 2017, the bankruptcy court might not approve the 
bankruptcy, and the bankruptcy will not discharge her secured debts, including her 
delinquent second mortgage. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial problems and 
other mitigating information. Applicant has been considering filing for bankruptcy for 
more than three years. At her hearing, she indicated she intended to file for bankruptcy, 
and on March 21, 2017, she filed for bankruptcy. She did not make a sufficient timely 
effort to settle, investigate, or resolve five SOR debts and her second mortgage. There 
is not enough assurance that her financial problems are being resolved, are under 
control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, she failed to 
establish that financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                                                                                                            
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
4 Applicant’s SOR does not list the delinquent $82,000 second mortgage on her home. In ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
This non-SOR allegation will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a contractor, and she has been employed 
by the same contractor in health-care services for 17 years. Three years ago she 
moved into a federal-health program. In 2001, she married. There is no evidence that 
she violated trustworthiness rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used 
illegal drugs.   
 
Applicant presented some positive financial information. She presented evidence 
of circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances. She mitigated 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.g.   
 
The negative financial information is more significant. Applicant owes five 
delinquent SOR debts. In addition, her $82,000 second mortgage is delinquent or 
unresolved. She received notice of the trustworthiness concerns when she received the 
SOR and should have contacted the creditors to obtain a definitive status of the debts 
and possibly take action to resolve them. She knew her Chapter 13 mortgage was 
dismissed in March 2013, and she did not provide any evidence that she contacted 
these SOR creditors. She did not provide enough evidence of timely efforts to clarify the 
status, resolve, settle, or mitigate five SOR debts.      
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of 
access to sensitive information. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated at this time. This decision 
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the 
state of reform necessary for award of a public trust position in the future. With a track 
record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of her worthiness for a public trust position.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated at this time. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
