 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05516 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 13, 2014. 
On March 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 1, 2016; and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on May 13, 2016. On the same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 
 2
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The FORM 
consisted of nine items, including the summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted by a security investigator April 2015 (Item 3). Applicant received the FORM on 
May 20, 2016, did not respond. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2017.  
 
The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department 
Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI 
summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to 
consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not authenticated. I conclude that 
Applicant waived any objections to the PSI summary by failing to respond to the FORM. 
Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take 
timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 
12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations, and he explained 
what he had done to resolve his delinquent debts. I have incorporated his admissions and 
explanations in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old graphic artist employed by a federal contractor since 
October 2007. He was self-employed as a graphic artist from December 2004 until he 
accepted his current position. He has held a security clearance since December 1983.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from May 1972 to May 
1976 and received an honorable discharge. He received a general educational 
development (GED) certificate while he was in the Marine Corps. He has no formal 
education beyond high school. 
 
Applicant married in April 1984 and divorced in August 1997. He married his 
current spouse in February 1998. His current spouse is a foreign-born naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He has two adult children from his first marriage, ages 27 and 30. He has traveled 
to his wife’s country of birth for two to three weeks each year from December 2007 to 
December 2013 to vacation and visit his wife’s family during the Christmas-New Year’s 
holidays. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed that he was paying his federal 
income taxes for 2013 through an installment agreement. He also disclosed four 
delinquent credit card accounts that were suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failure 
to pay as agreed: (1) an account charged off for $2,780 in August 2009 and resolved in 
August 2012; (2) an account that became delinquent in August 2009 for $7,225, which 
was resolved in December 2012; (3) an account that was charged off for $17,348 in 
August 2009 and resolved in December 2013; and (4) and account that was charged off 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
in August 2009 for $15,921 and resolved in August 2012. He attributed these delinquent 
accounts to paying only the monthly minimum balances, causing the balances to increase 
in spite of the monthly payments.  
 
Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) from November 2014 reflected two 
charged-off credit-card accounts from the same bank. One was charged off for $2,775 
and the other was charged off for $12,213. Both accounts were charged off in January 
2010. (Item 8 at 7.) The two charged-off credit-card accounts are the only debts alleged 
in the SOR, and they were resolved in December 2013.  
 
The November 2014 CBR reflected two tax liens, both for $3,786. One lien was 
paid and released in July 2009 and the other was paid and released in September 2009. 
(Item 8 at 5.) It is not clear whether the two entries in the CBR are duplicates. 
 
 In a previous SCA submitted in September 2003, Applicant stated that he was 
employed by a defense contractor from May 1986 to May 2009, unemployed from May 
2009 to February 2003, employed by a defense contractor for two months in 2003 and 
then unemployed for three months and self-employed for one month, and unemployed 
from August 2004 until the date he submitted his SCA. He also disclosed that he received 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in August 1998, that his pay had been garnished for 
delinquent child-support payments, and that he owed about $3,076 in federal income 
taxes.  
 
 After submitting his September 2003 SCA, Applicant was interviewed and 
submitted a sworn statement in February 2004. He stated that he was hired as a 
subcontractor in May 2002, started work in June 2002 and was laid off from September 
2002 to December 2003. He received unemployment compensation of $1,400 but had a 
child-support obligation of $976 per month. He fell behind on his child-support payments 
and his credit-card payments. He paid the child-support arrearage in January 2004. He 
submitted a personal financial statement reflecting that his net monthly income in January 
2003 was $3,086, his monthly expenses were $3,482. As of February 2004, he was able 
to make the minimum payments on his credit-card accounts. (Item 7.) His security 
clearance was continued, notwithstanding his previous delinquent debts.2  
 
 In a personal subject interview (PSI) in April 2015, Applicant told an investigator 
that a state tax lien for $3,786 was imposed for unpaid property taxes on his home and 
paid in July 2009. He was unaware of the delinquent property taxes, which were the result 
of an increase after reassessment, until he was contracted by a collection agency. 
                                                          
2 The only debts alleged in the SOR were the two credit-card accounts that were resolved in December 
2013. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may not be an independent basis for denying or revoking a security 
clearance. However, it may considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of 
a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the 
financial delinquencies not alleged in the SOR for these limited purposes. 
 
 
 4
In the PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he hired a debt-resolution company 
to resolve the delinquent credit-card accounts, and several accounts were resolved. In 
August 2012, he had accumulated $12,000, and he contacted the debt-resolution 
company to obtain settlement offers for two remaining debts. He was unable to contact 
the debt-resolution company and believes that it went out of business. He contacted the 
bank that had issued the two credit cards, paid the penalties and interest, and persuaded 
the bank to cancel the debts. Both debts were cancelled in December 2013. He received 
an IRS Form 1099-C for each debt and reported the cancelled debts on his federal income 
tax return for 2013. Applicant’s February 2016 CBR (Item 9) reflected no delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 5
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his November 2014 CBR establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 6
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. Applicant’s debts were numerous and were not 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur, but his debts are not recent. 
He resolved his last delinquent debts in December 2013, and his most recent CBR reflects 
no delinquent debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant had numerous periods of unemployment. 
Even when he was self-employed, he often had times when he was without any 
subcontracts. He was financially unsophisticated, not realizing for many years that 
minimum payments on credit-card accounts did not reduce the balances. Nevertheless, 
he gave high priority to his child-support obligations and paid the arrearages when he 
was financially able. He kept in contact with his creditors, even though he was making 
only the minimum payments. He obtained the assistance of a debt-resolution company. 
He was unaware of the property tax lien until he was contacted by a collection agency, 
and he promptly resolved the lien. When he had difficulty paying his federal income taxes, 
he negotiated a payment plan. He resolved his last delinquent debts in December 2013 
and is now current on all his obligations. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant obtained the assistance of a debt-
management company for help in resolving his debts, who helped him resolve several 
debts. When he lost contact with the company, he contacted his creditors directly and 
resolved his two remaining debts. His documentary evidence showing resolution of the 
two debts alleged in the SOR and February 2016 CBR showing no delinquent debts 
provide “clear evidence” that his financial problems have been resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant systematically paid, settled, or otherwise 
resolved all his delinquent debts. 
 
 7
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although the November 2014 CBR reflects that 
Applicant disputed the two debts alleged in the SOR, he presented no documentary 
evidence of the basis for his disputes, and they appear to have been resolved against 
him. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has held his current job for more than nine years, and he has held a 
security clearance and worked for other federal contractors for many years. He has limited 
formal education, and he did not realize that carrying high credit-card balances and 
making only minimum payments was foolish. He traveled annually to visit his wife’s family, 
but there is no evidence of funding source for that travel and no evidence that he spent 
extravagantly during his family visits.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
  
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
