 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07923 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 14, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 6, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on June 15, 2016. Applicant’s response from June 2016 is marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017. The 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 3 and AE 1 are admitted in 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. She obtained her high-school diploma in 1973. She 
was previously married from 1976 to 1983, and has one adult child.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from September 2012 to September 2013, and April 
2014 to August 2014. Applicant supported herself through personal savings during both 
periods of unemployment. Applicant worked part-time as a cashier from August 2014 to 
April 2015. She began her current job with a federal contractor in February 2015. She 
was first granted a DOD security clearance in 1981.1 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file her federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2011 through 2014, as required. Applicant disclosed her failure to 
file her federal and state income tax returns in her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) from April 2015, and during her interview by an authorized DOD 
investigator in May 2015. She stated that she was consulting with a tax professional and 
expected to file her relevant tax returns by December 2015.2 
 
 Applicant attributes her failure to timely file her relevant federal and state income 
tax returns to poor record keeping. In addition, she stated that she had been living in 
one state while simultaneously dealing with her elderly mother’s health issues and living 
arrangements in another state. Applicant tried to maintain her own as well as her 
mother’s finances, to include attempting to file both of their tax returns. Applicant 
became distracted and confused by the difficulty of doing so, and her financial records 
system became problematic. She thus was unable to provide appropriate tax records to 
file her 2011 tax returns, which then caused difficulties for subsequent tax years. 
Applicant provided a letter from a tax company dated April 14, 2016, which states that 
they have prepared Applicant’s income tax returns for 2011 through 2015 and will 
submit them to the IRS and relevant states upon receipt of information from Applicant.3  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3; AE 1.  
 
2 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
3 Items 1, 2, 3; AE 1. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
4 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to file her federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 
through 2014, as required. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
  
 As of June 2016, Applicant had yet to file her federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2011 through 2014. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that 
her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her failure to timely file her relevant tax 
returns casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. 
 
Circumstances beyond her control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had not filed her relevant federal and 
state income tax returns, despite her indication that she planned to do so by December 
2015. While she provided documentation from April 2016 to show that she was working 
with a tax company, they had not yet filed her tax returns. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, or that she has her 
financial situation under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
5 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has worked for her current company since 2015. She was first granted 
a DOD security clearance in 1981. Circumstances beyond her control contributed to her 
failure to file her federal and state income tax returns from 2011 through 2014, as 
required. As of June 2016, she had yet to file her tax returns. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
