 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03162 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline K, handling 
protected information, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline K, handling protected information, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 13, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 28, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through W. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. After the record closed, Applicant forwarded additional correspondence and 
exhibits that were marked as AE A-1, B-1, and X. There was no objection and the 
exhibits were admitted.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 8, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.d by deleting the words “which 
contained classified information.” The motion was granted without objection.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1979 and is working 
towards completing a master’s degree. He married in 1987 and has no children. He 
received a military commission through ROTC in 1979 and served on active duty until 
1980, when he transferred to the reserves. At various time, he was recalled to active 
duty for extended periods and participated in numerous military campaigns. Applicant 
provided a copy of his certificate of release or discharge from active duty, which reflects 
his separation date as October 1, 2004, and the character of service as honorable.3 
 
 In approximately December 2003, an enlisted female soldier alleged Applicant 
“without consent, brushes her neck, kisses it, and continues to work.” She reported the 
incident. An investigation was conducted in January 2004 and completed in February 
2004. Applicant denied the conduct. The Investigating Officer found the soldier’s 
allegations credible and recommended that a General Officer Memorandum of 
Reprimand (GOMOR) be issued to Applicant. The Report of Investigation was 
forwarded to the Commanding General. In approximately June 2004, a GOMOR was 
issued to Applicant for “sexual assault and fraternization.”4 Applicant testified that the 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE I) is the Government’s discovery letter. HE II-V are email correspondence, which 
includes the Government’s replies regarding the submission of post-hearing exhibits.  
 
2 Tr. 84-87. 
 
3 Tr. 29-34; AE J. 
 
4 Tr. 130-135; AE X is a copy of the Report of Proceedings by Investigating Officer/ Board of Officers. The 
report provides a narrative of the facts of the incident and a recommendation. The nature of the facts are 
characterized in the SOR as a sexual assault and fraternization. The report describes the conduct 
reported by the soldier as “without consent, brushes her neck, kisses it, and continues to work.”  
 
 
3 
 
 
Army colonel who was responsible for the investigation “had it out for me,”5 and he 
should have recused himself from the investigation. He explained that the colonel did 
not want him in the theater of operation, did not like him because Applicant was 
involved in public affairs, and he had a “big camera.” Applicant stated that he was 
represented by counsel, his supervisor was involved in the investigation, and his 
supervisor provided a rebuttal.6  
 
 In November 2004, Applicant was notified a board would be held to determine if 
he should be involuntarily separated from the Army Reserve. In July 2005, he had a 
show cause hearing and the board recommended he be discharged from the reserves 
“under other than honorable conditions.”7  
 
In February 2007, Applicant received a letter from the Department of the Army, 
Review Boards Agency stating: “the Secretary of the Army directed you be informed 
that your characterization has been changed to UNDER HONORABLE CONDITIONS 
(GENERAL). New separation orders have been prepared and are enclosed.”8 The new 
separation orders state: “Type of Discharge: General.” Applicant was asked at the 
hearing, “What was your rank?” He responded, “lieutenant colonel.” He was then asked, 
“Was that the rank they retired you at or is that the rank you retained?” He responded, 
“That’s the rank I retained, and I’m working now.” He confirmed it was the rank of 
lieutenant colonel and he will be eligible to receive a pension when he reaches the 
appropriate age.9 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to ¶ 2.b of the SOR, he stated, “I was upgraded to an 
Honorable Discharge in 2007.” This statement is not accurate. Toward the conclusion of 
Applicant’s hearing he testified that approximately a year ago he received a letter from 
the Army advising him that his rank was reduced to major. He explained he 
misinterpreted my previous questions.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that in 2006, while employed with Business A, Applicant 
violated the company’s security rules and regulations by disclosing information 
regarding the contents of a contract to a potentially competing entity, thereby breaching 
non-disclosure agreements and provisions of an SF 312 non-disclosure agreement. The 
Government provided a copy of the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) log 
                                                          
5 Tr. 37. 
 
6 Tr. 32-37, 131-135; AE W. 
 
7 Tr. 32, 141-146. 
 
8 AE J. 
 
9 Tr. 34-35, 141-146. 
 
10 Tr. 135-146. This information will not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered 
when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, for mitigation, and in a whole-person analysis. 
 
 
4 
 
 
entry that noted an incident was reported on May 27, 2006, alleging the above conduct 
was occurring “in the recent past, and is currently, (as of week of 5/22/06).”11 Applicant 
disputed the allegation. Applicant testified that the owner of Business A, where 
Applicant was employed, wanted him to be in charge of a project. Applicant declined 
and wanted to leave Business A. Applicant testified that the owner told him, “If you don’t 
do this project, if you don’t do this, we’re going to slap (sic) that you gave out some 
classified information.”12 Applicant testified he never disclosed classified information 
and the allegation was fabricated. He stated that the owner’s motive was that the owner 
did not want Applicant to work for a competitor. The Government provided no other 
evidence regarding this allegation. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant 
violated security rules and procedures as alleged in this allegation.13 Applicant retained 
his security clearance at the time.14 I find for Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
In 2012, Applicant was employed by a government contractor and working in 
Afghanistan. In July 2012, Applicant received training on operational security. The 
topics included: a general overview; use of classified information and material; access 
control into a classified area; mitigating risk when handling classified information; the 
responsibility for providing training to anyone who is not cleared for classified access, 
but may likely have inadvertent access to classified information; and the specific 
requirements for access control to secured facilities and the responsibilities of those 
who gain access. Applicant acknowledged in writing that he received the appropriate 
training.15 
 
Applicant repeatedly throughout his written documents and his testimony refers 
to his “big camera.”16 In Afghanistan, there are restricted areas that are part of the 
village compound where civilian contractors received room and board. Camera use is 
specifically prohibited in restricted areas. The program manager working with the 
command in theater at the time confirmed that there were postings on the village 
compound prohibiting “the use” of cameras.17  
 
In November 2012, the director of security for the village compound, Ms. E, 
provided a detailed eviction request to the base commander with a summary of 
incidents committed by Applicant. Ms. E stated that Applicant repeatedly comments that 
because he is a news correspondent and his job is to videotape and take photos of 
                                                          
11 GE 5; Answer to SOR at Tab E.  
 
12 Tr. 38. 
 
13 Tr. 37-44; Answer to the SOR at Tab E. 
 
14 Tr. 44-45. 
 
15 Tr. 46; GE 4 and 6 at encl. 7; AE M. 
 
16 Applicant provided a photograph of the camera. It appears to be one that is used for filming for 
television. AE M. 
 
17 Tr. 55-57, 70; GE 6 at encl. 4. 
 
5 
 
 
residence and property in the village compound. She further stated that Applicant’s 
behavior makes some civilians living there uncomfortable because of the restrictions 
about cameras due to security and safety reasons. Ms. E stated that in July 2012, she 
personally asked Applicant to vacate a restricted area where he had a large TV-type 
camera. Ms. E confronted Applicant, and she stated that he was extremely defensive 
and aggressive telling her that this is his job. Ms. E notified security personnel because 
of Applicant’s behavior. She indicated that Applicant changed his story several times by 
explaining he was taking his camera for repairs, he no idea that cameras were not 
permitted, and then stating that he was not recording. He was instructed to leave the 
area. He complied. Ms. E observed that Applicant was extremely upset. She noted that 
the prohibition on the use of cameras is clearly posted, and it is part of the compound’s 
rules and regulations, which are posted on all restricted area doors in English and 
pictures for visuals.18  
 
In March 2013, a government investigator interviewed Applicant. He told the 
investigator about the July 2012 incident. He explained that he was carrying around a 
camera because he is employed as a videographer. He was in the village when his 
camera stopped working. He went to get a screwdriver to fix his camera and while he 
was walking into the village compound with his camera, Ms. E approached him and 
said, “Get out of here with that camera, as this is a no filming location.” Applicant told 
Mr. E that he was not filming and the camera was off, and he then entered a building to 
obtain the screwdriver. Applicant told the investigator that Ms. E was not happy and 
wanted him removed from the village. Ms. E reported the incident to the military 
commander, who counseled Applicant and told him not to get into any “problems or 
concerns” or he would be told to leave. Applicant told the investigator that this incident 
was a “complete misinterpretation.” He explained that because he is from the northeast 
that sometimes his language is misinterpreted. He acknowledged that she asked him to 
remove the camera from the premises. The commander informally counseled Applicant 
about his conduct.19 
 
 Applicant testified that people in the village compound did not like that he had a 
“big camera.” He admitted that he did have his “big camera” in the village compound, 
but said it was not located in a restricted area. He stated he was getting his camera 
repaired, and it did not have a video card in it. He stated that the Intercommunication 
Technology (IT) people did not want him around because he was involved in high-level 
work and because of his cameras and photo taking. He stated that the IT people were 
out to get him and had it out for him because of a perceived racial issue. When Ms. E 
confronted him, he stated that he showed her that he did not have a video card in the 
camera. He did not believe his discussion with Ms. E was “heated.”20  
 
                                                          
18 Tr. 70-73; GE 6 at encls. 4 and 7. 
 
19 Tr. 47, 51, 58-61; GE 2. 
 
20 Tr. 47, 51, 58-61, 73; GE 2 and 6 at encl. 7. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he had an office on the village compound that had multiple 
cameras in it. He stated it was understood that he needed to move from point A to point 
B with a camera. He stated not all areas on the village compound prohibit the use of 
cameras. He had a camera “near” the restricted area when Ms. E confronted him. He 
tried to explain that he did not have a video card in the camera so he could not record. 
He had other issues with Ms. E because he had earlier requested a closet from her and 
it was denied. He testified, “She’s one of the supervisors. And she had an axe to grind 
with me because of the camera . . . .”21 There is sufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant had his “big camera” in a restricted area, a security rule violation. 
 
Regarding the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c, two Afghan nationals, Mr. W and Mr. M 
provided signed sworn statements on August 13, 2012, describing events that occurred 
on August 11 and 12, 2012. Both letters are substantially the same. They stated that on 
August 11, 2012, while at the dining facility on the village compound, Applicant 
approached Mr. W. and started talking about Mr. W’s residence in the United States, his 
job, and the company where Mr. W works. Civilians of other nationalities were present 
when Applicant began discussing the information that Mr. W believed was classified. 
Applicant commented about a poem Mr. W had written and how this particular poem 
would save lives. Mr. W attempted to change the subject, but Applicant kept insisting he 
worked for General X and he had a top secret clearance.22  
 
The next day, both Mr. W and Mr. M were walking to their sleeping quarters and 
Applicant was walking towards them. Mr. W stated:  
 
I approached [Applicant] and asked if I could take a minute of his time. 
[Applicant] appeared to be under the influence of alcohol and replied very 
rapidly “about what?” I said “sir, if you could please refrain from talking 
about my work and the company I work for would be highly appreciated and 
not to approach me again in the future with any matter concerning my job.” 
[Applicant] said “Hold on! Why do you guys act like you do SECRET squirrel 
shit, because you are not. Everyone here knows what you do and what 
[Company L] does! Relax dude, no one cares. I have a SECRET 
clearance… Ah Top Secret clearance myself.” I replied “good for you sir, but 
as a friendly reminder, please refrain from putting my business out in the 
open in front of people none of us know. I will appreciate it very much.” 
Then [Applicant] started ranting about his positon and his job being more 
important than what I do and further said that “I used to work for a company 
that was a subcontractor to Company L in Iraq. I know exactly what they 
do.23  
 
                                                          
21 Tr. 48-51, 56-57, 71-78. 
 
22 GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
23 GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
7 
 
 
 Mr. W noted that Applicant was speaking loudly and disregarded his 
surroundings. He believed Applicant demonstrated poor operational security that could 
have seriously damaged operations and his personal security. 
 
 Applicant denied he disclosed classified information about Mr. W. He testified 
that he had a nice dinner conversation with Mr. W and Mr. M. Also at the dinner was 
Ms. S, who was working as a contractor for another company. She provided a 
statement saying there was “small friendly talk, NONCLASSIFIED” during dinner. She 
did not elaborate on specifics of what Applicant or Mr. W may have said during the 
conversation, specifically if Applicant had talked about Mr. W’s work or employer.24 
 
 Applicant testified that Company L engaged their employees, Mr. W and Mr. M, 
to lie about him and make false statements. He acknowledged they were at the same 
dinner table and that they saw each other the following night, but said they only spoke 
for five seconds and the statements they provided are false. Applicant testified that he 
does not consume alcohol, which is corroborated.25 He also stated that he did not have 
access to classified information. Applicant testified that he believed Company L, for 
whom Ms. E, Mr. W, and Mr. W worked, saw Applicant as a threat because he has the 
“big camera” and “ability to do a story about how bad things are.” He believed that 
because he worked in an area that could expose Company L to wrongdoing, it wanted 
him out of the country. Applicant indicated that he believed that Company L told these 
employees to make false statements. Applicant explained that there were others who 
also wanted him out of the country, such as a person employed by Applicant’s company 
at the time, whom he believed was in collusion with Company L and was providing 
Company L sensitive information.26  
 
On August 17, 2012, Applicant was formally counseled by the commander on 
violation of operational security. The formal counseling memorandum for the record that 
Applicant signed noted that on August 11 and 12, 2012, Applicant compromised the 
identities of Mr. W and Mr. M and the sensitive nature of their employment by 
discussing sensitive information in an uncontrolled environment. The commander 
further counseled him that “discussions inquiring into the nature of personnel duties and 
responsibilities are to be completely avoided in the [village compound] and other camps 
unless mission requirements dictate.”27 Applicant was directed to refrain from 
“discussing any work related topics which could jeopardize the exposure of a sensitive 
command and its mission to the campaign.”28 There is sufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant violated security procedures by disclosing sensitive information.  
 
                                                          
24 Tr. 80-84; AE A. 
 
25 GE 6 at encl. 8. 
 
26 Tr. 81-84, 124-130; GE 2 at page 3-5.; AE F, G. 
 
27 GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
28 GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
8 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that in November 2012, Applicant violated security rules and 
procedures when he permitted an Afghan national (Mr. F) unattended access to a 
terminal that was logged on to a computer system which contained classified 
information. The IT Advisor of the village compound, Mr. R, reported the incident. He 
stated in his report that he witnessed a security violation by Applicant in November 
2012, in which Applicant allowed Mr. F unattended access to Applicant’s unclassified 
computer system which is co-located in conjunction with Applicant’s secret classified 
computer system. Mr R’s report explained that Applicant’s workstation is located in an 
area which affords visibility to other confidential computer systems within the 
organization. Upon identifying the breach of security, Mr. R immediately informed the 
security manager of the potential breach of security and regulations regarding local 
nationals and access to computer systems in a secured area. He further reminded the 
security manager of a previous conversation with him about Applicant leaving hard 
drives and other data products unattended at his workstation and the possibility of a 
potential security violation. These hard drives should be uploaded onto a server 
provided for storage and be secured at all times. Mr. R stated that he previously 
engaged Applicant about these issues, and Applicant became visibly irritated and 
showed a disregard for security protocol. Mr. R sends quarterly security updates to 
personnel regarding such issues to ensure that the organization does not become 
complacent regarding computer security.29 
 
 Applicant addressed this allegation during his March 2013 interview with a 
government investigator. He told the investigator that there were three computers by a 
workstation, and he was using one for a project. Mr. R reported Applicant because Mr. 
R believed that Applicant had Mr. F using a computer with the unclassified system that 
had access to log onto a classified system. Applicant told the investigator that Mr. R did 
not like him and assumed that Mr. R was aware of previous accusations that occurred 
on the village compound, and Mr. R wanted him out. Applicant denied to the investigator 
that a security violation occurred. He indicated that Mr. F was never on the computer 
system. Applicant stated he did not have classified information on computer systems 
that Mr. F could see. Applicant was working on a project, and Mr. F was sitting at 
Applicant’s workstation.30 
 
 On December 3, 2012, the facility security officer (FSO) for Applicant’s employer 
met with him to discuss the incidents alleged. With regard to the allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.d, Applicant told the FSO that Mr. F had authorization to be in the secure area. Mr. F’s 
presence was announced and those present were told that everything needed to be 
unclassified. Mr. F mentioned to Applicant that he needed to submit his invoice and 
asked if Applicant had access to G-mail. Applicant indicated that he did and was going 
to assist Mr. F, but was called away from the area for a moment. Applicant left himself 
logged in to his unclassified government computer and the G-mail login screen was on 
the computer. Applicant was still in the work area, but not at his workstation when Mr. R 
came in and saw Mr. F at Applicant’s workstation. Applicant confirmed to his FSO that 
                                                          
29 Tr. 47, 84; GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
30 GE 2. 
 
9 
 
 
the computers in that area had a switch box to switch between unclassified systems and 
classified systems. Applicant feels that Mr. F saw the G-mail login and sat down to 
submit his invoice not knowing he could not work on this system. Subsequent to this 
statement to the FSO, two days later, Applicant advised the FSO by email that Mr. F 
never actually touched the keys to his computer, but was simply sitting at the 
Applicant’s workstation.31 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant testified that Mr. F was at Applicant’s desk, standing by 
him in close proximity of other government computers. Applicant stated that Mr. R’s 
allegations, “They were all false allegations. They’re all false.”32 He testified that Mr. R 
made up the allegation. He confirmed he read Mr. R’s statement and stated it was a 
fabrication.33  
 
Applicant testified that Mr. F was “at my computer.” He specifically stated it was 
his personal and not a government computer. Applicant confirmed that Mr. F was 
required to be escorted and attended to while in the secure area. Applicant did not 
initially escort him into the secure area, but took control over him and someone was 
required to be with him at all times. Applicant stated that Mr. F was “always around me.” 
Applicant testified that he does not recall leaving Mr. F unattended. He said, “If he 
wasn’t with me, he was within three feet.” Applicant was confronted with the 
contradiction that he told the FSO that he was called away momentarily. He stated he 
did not recall his prior statement to his FSO, but confirmed that his statement to her was 
likely more accurate, having occurred shortly after the event. He went on to emphasize 
that Mr. F was being watched all the time. There is sufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant violated security procedures by allowing Mr. F unattended access to a 
terminal that was logged on to an unclassified computer that could be switched to a 
classified computer.34  
   
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that around November 2012, while employed by a 
government contractor and working in Afghanistan, Applicant was reprimanded for a 
history of leaving hard drives and other media unattended at his workstation. Applicant 
testified that when he worked in the secured area he had hard drives that he would pass 
to other people in the area. When he would leave for the day, he would properly secure 
the hard drives in his possession, but others he gave hard drives to would not secure 
them properly. He testified he told these people they were to lock them, and they did 
not. He testified that the hard drives did not contain classified information. Applicant 
further testified that Mr. R had put out an edict reminding personnel of their 
responsibility to secure the hard drives. Applicant denied he was counseled, but 
admitted Mr. R, at one point, engaged Applicant about the hard drives, and Applicant 
                                                          
31 GE 6 at encls. 8 and 9. 
 
32 Tr. 53. 
 
33 Tr. 90-93. 
 
34 Tr. 89-97. 
 
 
10 
 
 
told him that he gave the hard drives to personnel who failed to secure them. Applicant 
stated that he and Mr. R did not like each other. He testified that Mr. R was looking for 
ways to make Applicant’s life miserable. He believed “the IT people were out to get 
me.”35 
 
 In his December 3, 2012, interview with his FSO, Applicant told her that because 
of long hours occasionally people would leave external devices on their workstation, but 
normally the next person through would put the device in a desk drawer.36 There is 
sufficient evidence to conclude Mr. R advised Applicant about leaving hard drives 
unattended and failing to properly store them.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges that in November 2012, while employed by a government 
contractor, Applicant was “accused of making improper inquiries into activities of a 
restricted program.” A retired Marine lieutenant colonel and corporate representative 
provided a statement and opined about Applicant and what he was told by others.37 
Applicant believed that a competing contractor told the corporate representative to 
make a negative statement against Applicant because the competitor had learned that 
Applicant had damaging information about it. Applicant testified that there were 
numerous people in collusion to try and get him removed from Afghanistan.38 When 
asked directly why all of these people wanted Applicant removed, he stated, “Because I 
have the potential, with the big camera then to do a story about [the village compound], 
and that will make [the village compound] look bad, and then they’ll lose business.”39 He 
further stated, “And I have the ability because I have contacts and resources that I could 
do a story. I could.”40 The information in the corporate representative’s letter may be 
negative character evidence, but it is insufficient to support this allegation. The 
corporate representative noted that Applicant sarcastically asked him questions during 
dinner in front of others about a Navy captain. He did not appreciate Applicant’s inquiry, 
but I am unable to make a determination that this was an improper inquiry into activities 
of a restricted program. The allegation and evidence are vague. Being accused of doing 
something improper does not rise to an allegation of actually doing something improper. 
An accusation is not evidence. There is insufficient evidence to support this allegation. I 
find in favor of Applicant for this allegation.41 
 
                                                          
35 Tr. 47, 88, 97-108. 
 
36 GE 6 at encl. 8. 
 
37 GE 6 at encl. 7. 
 
38 Tr. 65-66; AE A, B. 
 
39 Tr. 67, 124-130. 
 
40 Tr. 67-69.  
 
41 Tr. 63-66, 108-115; GE 6 at encl. 7, Memorandum for the Record dated November 22, 2012.  
 
11 
 
 
 On November 26, 2012, Applicant received a Memorandum for the Record from 
the Commander; the subject was “FORMAL COUNSELING ON UNPROFESSIONAL 
BEHAVIOR AND SUBSEQUENT EVICTION FROM CONTRACTED BILLETING.” The 
memorandum stated: “Your continued display of unprofessional behavior is a liability to 
the reputation of the organization. You are hereby released from the contract and 
directed to coordinate with [your employer] for immediate departure.” Applicant refused 
to sign the memorandum, but it was witnessed by the Sergeant Major of the command, 
Applicant’s Program Manager, and the Commander.42 There is sufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant was evicted from the village compound in Afghanistan due to 
his security practices.  
 
 During Applicant’s March 2013 interview, he stated that the competing 
contractor, Company L, wanted him off the contract so it would be more competitive and 
be awarded the government contract. He stated that he always followed security 
procedures throughout his military and civilian careers.  
 
 Applicant provided a voluminous number of documents attesting to his subject-
matter expertise in his field, the outstanding quality of his work, his willingness to assist 
others, along with numerous comments from high-ranking officers and public figures 
thanking him for his services and expertise. He provided character letters stating he is 
professional, competent and courteous. He also provided numerous photographs and 
copies of his work product. 43  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
42 Tr. 115-123; GE 6 at encl. 7. The eviction notice references another incident that allegedly occurred in 
October 2012. That incident is not alleged in the SOR and is not considered for disqualifying purposes. 
 
43 AE B, C, D, L, M, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W; Answer to SOR. 
 
12 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
 (a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
 
13 
 
 
 (g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and  
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant brought his “big camera” into a restricted area, a security violation 
(SOR ¶1.b). He spoke about sensitive information with an Afghan national (Mr. W) in an 
unsecured area where others were present, a violation of security rules and regulations 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant left an Afghan national (Mr. F) unattended at Applicant’s 
computer while it was logged into an unclassified system that was capable of being 
switched to a classified system, a security violation (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant was told by 
Mr. R about the security concerns of leaving hard drives unattended and his failure to 
store them properly. Applicant admitted the hard drives were often not stored properly 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant was evicted from the village compound in Afghanistan due to his 
behavior and security practices (SOR ¶ 1.g). I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35, and I have 
specifically considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual currently reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.  
 
Throughout much of Applicant’s hearing, I did not find his testimony credible. 
Although it has been almost four and half years since the incidents in Afghanistan 
occurred, I cannot find that they occurred under unusual circumstances or they are 
unlikely to recur. His conduct cast doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 35(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant received security training and was counseled about his conduct 
regarding security-related issues. Shortly after his counselling, he repeated the 
behavior. He failed to take responsibility for any of his actions. He believes everyone 
involved in the allegations does not like him, were out to get him, and were conspiring to 
have him removed because he could expose their complicity in nefarious conduct. 
There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶¶ 35(b) or 35(c).   
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, trustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
The allegations in the SOR were cross-alleged under the personal conduct 
guideline and are equally a security concern under this guideline. I found in favor of 
Applicant on SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, and they are not considered under this guideline. 
Applicant discussed Mr. W’s personal and sensitive information in a public area; his 
failure to be attentive in securing hard drives even after he had given them to others; 
bringing a camera into a restricted area; allowing a foreign national unattended access 
to a unclassified computer that had the ability to switch to a classified computer; and his 
eventual eviction from the Afghanistan village compound raise personal conduct 
security concerns. In addition, Applicant was involuntary separated and discharged from 
the Army Reserve and received a GOMOR for sexual assault and fraternization with a 
female soldier. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
15 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant’s conduct while in the Army and his subsequent involuntary separation 
are not minor offenses. I did not find his comments about the characterization of his 
discharge credible. Some of Applicant’s conduct while in Afghanistan rose to the level of 
violating security rules and regulations as addressed above. This conduct also raises 
security concerns regarding Applicant’s personal conduct. He failed to acknowledge or 
take responsibility for any of the conduct alleged in the SOR, which causes me to 
conclude that it is likely to recur and casts doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
16 
 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old extremely talented subject-matter expert in his field. He 
provided an overwhelming amount of evidence as to the quality of his work, comments 
from high-level officials regarding their appreciation for his commitment and service in 
assisting in the success of the mission, and letters attesting to his professional 
attributes. However, Applicant’s success in his career endeavors does not outweigh his 
conduct. He was discharged from the Army Reserve and initially received an other than 
honorable discharge that was later upgraded to a general discharge under honorable 
conditions. He violated security rules and regulations while working in Afghanistan. His 
testimony was not credible. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion. His 
conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the handling protected information and personal conduct 
guidelines security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
