 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00097 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has family who are citizens 
and residents of Colombia and he had an interest in real estate there. Additionally, eight 
years ago he actively sought to obtain Colombian citizenship. Applicant has mitigated 
the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
  
History of the Case 
 
 On August 21, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing foreign preference 
and foreign influence security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On September 25, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. (Answer) On February 17, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a hearing to be convened on February 25, 2016. 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2 and Applicant’s Exs. A, B, 
and C were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record 
was kept open to allow Applicant to present additional documents. In March 2016, an 
additional document was received and admitted as Ex. D. On March 4, 2016, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted he acquired Colombian 
citizenship in 2010, that he had extended family members who were citizens and 
residents of Colombia, and that he had an interest in real estate in Colombia worth 
approximately $40,000. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, submissions, and transcripts, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old systems engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2014, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Ex. 1) His 
annual salary is $76,300. (Ex. A, Tr. 32) In March 2015, he received a $250 incentive 
award for his exceptional teamwork. (Ex. B) His most recent performance evaluation 
rates him as “Exceeded Commitments.” (Ex. C) His work is outstanding. (Ex. C)  
 
In November 1987, Applicant was born in the United States. His mother was born 
in Colombia and in 1994 or 1995, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen. His father is a 
retired insurance salesman who is a native-born U.S. citizen. (Tr. 26) In September 
2008, while he was a college student and 20 years old, he obtained a Colombian 
passport, which was destroyed in July 2014. (Tr. 23, 58) It was destroyed by a member 
of his company’s security office. (Ex. 1, Tr. 17, 24) He has no intentions of renewing his 
Colombian passport. (Ex. 2) He is willing to renounce his Colombian citizenship if 
requested. (Tr. 24)  
 
Applicant’s mother encouraged him to obtain the Colombian passport to facilitate 
travel to Colombia, and Colombian citizenship would facilitate the transfer and 
inheritance of property in Colombia. (SOR Answer, Ex. 2, Tr. 23) Applicant’s 
grandparent’s home in Colombia is worth approximately $600,000. (Ex. 2) The home is 
currently used by his relatives as a week-end, vacation home. (Ex. 2, Tr. 41) No one 
lives in the home permanently nor is it used as rental. (Tr. 42) In 2012, Applicant took 
possession of a share (1/15th) of real estate, which he received through his mother. 
(Answer) His mother maintained management and control of his share of the property. 
(Tr. 25) He considered the property as being his mother’s property. (Tr. 39)  
 
Applicant never considered the interest in the home a significant portion of 
money. (Tr. 20) He considered the interest in the home an inheritance that he never 
expected to receive. (Tr. 20) He considered it of little financial importance. (Tr. 25) In 
March 2016, he signed a power of attorney to allow the transfer of his interest in the 
home to his mother. (Ex. D)  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s mother has four siblings and he has seven cousins who are citizens 
and residents of Colombia. (Tr. 25) He has an aunt, uncles, and cousins with whom he 
exchanges pleasantries and well wishes on special occasions. (Ex. 1, Answer) None of 
his extended family work for the Colombian government. Other than when he is in 
Colombia, he has telephone contact with his aunt and uncle once a quarter and with 
one cousin monthly and another cousin each quarter. (Ex. 2) He has weekly contact 
with a cousin who lives near him in the United States. (Ex. 2, Tr. 30) One uncle became 
a U.S. citizen 15 years ago and lives in Florida. (Tr. 30) Most of his mother’s siblings are 
retired. (Tr. 30)  
 
Applicant’s mother travels to Colombia frequently both for business and personal 
reasons. (Tr. 34) Applicant travels to Colombia every two or three years. (Tr. 28) During 
March and April 2011 and July and August 2013, he visited Colombia for less than 20 
days on each visit. (Ex. 1) In 2015, he traveled to Colombia on his U.S. passport. (Tr. 
24) Other than Applicant obtaining his now surrendered passport and his possible 
inheritance, Applicant has not exercised any rights or benefits afforded him though his 
Colombian citizenship. 
 
Applicant obtained his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the United States. (Tr. 
19) He also went to grade school and high school in the United States. (Tr. 27) His wife, 
a native-born U.S. citizen, is in pharmacy school. (Tr. 33) He has $60,000 in his 401(k) 
retirement plan. (Tr. 32) The fair market value of his home is $150,000 on which he 
owes $100,000. (Tr. 33) Applicant stated his job and career path are very important to 
him. (Tr. 58)  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Colombia. (Tr. 14; Administrative Notice Request, November 30, 2015) Department 
Counsel provided supporting documents to show “verification, detail and context” for 
these facts in the Administrative Notice request. Id. Applicant did not object to me taking 
administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the documents. (Tr. 14) See the 
Colombia section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts 
from Department Counsel’s submissions on Colombia.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004); and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Colombia 
 
 The United States is Colombia’s largest trading partner. However, for nearly 50 
years, Colombia has experienced conflict with illegal armed groups, including Marxist 
guerillas and transnational criminal and narcotics trafficking organizations. The 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (the FARC) and the National Liberation Army 
have been designed by the U.S. Secretary of State as terrorist organizations. U.S. travel 
warnings for Colombia warn U.S. citizens of the danger of traveling to Colombia and 
especially the potential for violence by terrorists groups and armed criminal gangs, who 
routinely kidnap individuals and hold them for ransom. Serious human rights problems 
exist in Colombia.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant was born in the United States and lived his entire live in the United 
States. His mother, who was born in Colombia, has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for 
more than 20 years. In 2008, when Applicant was a 20-year-old college student, his 
mother influenced him to obtain Colombia citizenship, which he did. For a period of 
time, Applicant had a Colombian passport2 which he surrendered and it has been 
destroyed. AG ¶ 10(b) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; and 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship. 
  
Applicant’s Colombian citizenship was the result of his mother being a 
Colombian citizen. However, he chose to take steps to obtain his citizenship. He offered 
                                                          
2 Applicant had already surrendered his Colombian passport. Had it been listed as a concern in the SOR, 
AG ¶ 11(e) “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated,” would have negated the security concern. 
 
 
 
6 
 
to renounce his Colombian citizenship. AG ¶ 11(b) applies and foreign preference 
concerns are mitigated.  
 
Foreign Influence 
  
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;3 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant has an aunt and uncle and six cousins who are citizens and residents 
of Colombia. He has in-person contact with his Colombian relatives when he visits every 
two or three years and quarterly telephone contact with others. He had an interest in his 
grandparent’s home, which he has now taken action to transfer his interest to his 
mother. 
                                                          
3 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
Four of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant’s contact with his relatives in Colombia is infrequent and sufficiently 
casual that the contact does not create any risk of foreign influence. None of those 
relatives are in positions connected with the Colombian government or engaged in 
activities that would likely cause Applicant to be exploited or placed in a position of 
having to choose between them and the United States. He also has an uncle who is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen living in the United States and a cousin who also lives in the 
United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) apply. 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. He was born, raised, and educated in the United 
States. His father and wife are native-born American citizens. His mother was born in 
Colombia, but became a naturalized U.S. citizen more than 20 years ago. In contrast, 
his ties to Colombia have always been minimal. He has passed his interest in his 
grandparent’s home to his mother and, therefore, has no property or financial interest in 
Colombia. Applicant never considered the interest in the house as an intricate part of his 
finances. His annual salary and retirement balance countered any concern he had in the 
Colombian property before he took action to surrender the property to his mother. AG 
¶¶ 8(b) and (f) apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
 
8 
 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  An administrative judge must evaluate an appellant’s security 
eligibility by considering the totality of the appellant’s conduct and all the relevant 
circumstances including the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards granting 
Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He has lived in the United 
States his entire life as have his father and wife. He attended grade school, high school, 
obtained his bachelor’s degree, and earned an advanced degree from U.S. institutions. 
He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and surrendered his Colombian 
passport to his employer. There is no derogatory information about him in the record. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence.4 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C, Foreign Preference:  FOR APPLICANT 
                                                          
4 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
