 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07782 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
On September 19, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs. 
 
 
2 
January 24, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on February 23, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 
19, 2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection.2 Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C. They were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until May 3, 2017, 
and was subsequently extended to May 22, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant did not provide additional documents and the record closed.3 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.m, 1.r, and 1.u 
through 1.bb. She denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She earned her General Equivalency Diploma, went to 
vocational school, and has taken some college classes. She has been married three 
times and is presently in a common law marriage. She has an adult daughter, who lives 
with her and works part-time. Her husband has been unemployed for approximately 
nine months due to an injury.4  
 
 Applicant failed to pay her 2014 federal (SOR ¶ 1.a - $3,114) and state income 
taxes (SOR ¶ 1.b - $509). She testified that she had not had enough money withheld 
from her paycheck to cover her tax debt when she withdrew $28,000 from her 401k 
pension account, as a result of hardship. She never contacted the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) to address the tax debt. She stated she probably received 
correspondence from the IRS, but could not remember. She believes her federal tax 
debt was paid through refunds to which she was entitled for subsequent years. She 
believed her state tax refund was applied to the amount she owed on her federal tax 
debt. She stated she received a $300 refund for tax year 2016. She cannot remember if 
the state contacted her about tax issues. She did not provide any documents showing 
her 2014 federal or state tax debts are paid.5  
 
 Applicant took the hardship loan from her 401k pension account to pay bills. She 
stated the money is almost depleted, and she cannot recall specifically how she spent it. 
She is not required to repay it because it was a hardship loan. She owns a horse. From 
the pension loan, Applicant used approximately $2,000 to purchase a horse trailer. She 
used about $5,000 to pay personal loans and bills. She testified she has two other 401k 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I (HE) is Department Counsel’s discovery letter. HE II is an exhibit list. 
 
3 HE III are copies of the email correspondence from Applicant, with responses from Department Counsel 
and me regarding Applicant’s requests for an extension of the date for the closing of the record. 
 
4 Tr. 19-25. 
 
5 Tr. 25-37. 
 
 
3 
loans that she is repaying. She does not have a budget. She stated she pays what bills 
she can on payday and then is broke. She stated she intended to attend financial 
counseling, but never did. She is attempting to obtain a loan to pay her debts. She has 
$5 or $10 in her checking and saving accounts.6  
 
 A credit report from June 2015 substantiates the debts alleged in the SOR.7 
Applicant did not provide information about the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 
1.k, 1.m, and 1.n.  
 
 Applicant believed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.s, 1.t, 1.u, 1.v, 1.w, 1.x, 
1.z, 1.aa, 1.bb are medical bills. She stated these debts became due in the past two 
years and are likely for copays or cost-share amounts. She testified she received bills 
for her medical expenses, but did not open the bills until they were delinquent. She 
attributed her behavior to a symptom of depression, for which she is being treated. 
Applicant stated that after she spoke with a government investigator, as part of her 
background interview in July 2015, she contacted the creditors, but she never followed 
through to address the debts. She assumed she paid the bills in SOR ¶¶ 1.aa and 1.bb, 
but had no proof. She stated she made $5 payments on some of the bills.8 The above 
listed debts are unresolved.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l is a home equity loan. Applicant testified she sold the 
home in January 2017. She owned the home, but her brother was living in it, and was 
supposed to make the mortgage payments. He passed away in May 2016. Applicant 
provided a document regarding a lawsuit on the property. The lawsuit was dismissed. 
She believed that when the home sold, it satisfied her home mortgage and equity loan. 
Applicant’s March 2017 credit report shows the account has a zero balance past due. 
The debt is resolved.9 
 
 Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g for a car loan was paid. She stated 
she has the title to the car. Her March 2017 credit report shows the account as “paid, 
charge-off.” The debt is resolved.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($956) is a credit card account. It is reflected on 
Applicant’s June 2015 credit report, but not on her March 2017 credit report. Applicant 
testified she contacted the credit bureau about the debt, but had not received a 
response.11 It is unresolved. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29, 64-69. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. 54-61. 
 
9 Tr. 38-45; GE 2; AE A, B. 
 
10 Tr. 45-46; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. 46-49; GE 2. 
 
4 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is a past due car loan in Applicant’s name (past due $381, 
balance $18,586). Applicant’s daughter uses the car. They agreed each would pay half 
of the monthly payment. She testified that they could not afford to make the payments.12 
The debt is unresolved. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($323) is a cable television account that was in 
Applicant’s name, but which she permitted her brother to use. She asked the creditor if 
she could make $5 payments on the account, but she did not follow through with the 
payments.13 It remains unresolved. 
  
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2004 divorce. She learned her 
husband was a drug addict and she acquired a lot of marital debt. Her current husband 
is unable to work. She stated she does not have enough money to pay debts and 
support her family. She stated she is in the process of getting a personal loan to pay her 
debts. Applicant provided copies of her productivity reports, awards, and performance 
evaluations that reflect her performance exceeds expectations.14 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
12 Tr. 61-63; GE 2. 
 
13 Tr. 50-53. 
 
14 Tr. 70-74; AE C. 
 
5 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.15 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid and unresolved. 
She does not have a thorough understanding of her finances. She failed to follow 
through on contacting creditors regarding delinquent debts. She has made limited 
attempts to pay those debts. Insufficient evidence was provided to conclude that her 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her inability or unwillingness to address her 
debts casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her current husband’s 
unemployment and her 2004 divorce. These matters are beyond her control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant admitted she did not open her bills when they arrived. She did 
not follow through on contacting creditors or make the minimum payments to creditors 
as promised. She has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies.  
 
 
7 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Most of Applicant’s bills have not 
been addressed. She provided minimal proof of actions she has taken to resolve her 
delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence that her financial problems are under 
control. She testified that she believed her tax debts were resolved through the 
involuntary withholding of tax refunds that were applied to the debts. She did not 
provide evidence that these debts were resolved with tax refunds. Her actions do not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve tax debts. Insufficient evidence was provided 
regarding her efforts to resolve other debts. There is no evidence that her financial 
issues are under control AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of any attempt to dispute the 
legitimacy of a past-due debt or documents to substantiate any effort to resolve such 
issues. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she made arrangements with the IRS or 
her state regarding her tax issues and they are resolved. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She has numerous delinquent debts that she is unable 
or unwilling to resolve. Applicant may be doing the best she can under the 
circumstances, but she does not have a firm grasp on her debts and has intentionally 
ignored some by not opening bills until they were delinquent. She has not made good-
faith efforts to contact creditors. She failed to pay minimum payments to a creditor after 
 
8 
she promised to do so. She intended to seek financial counseling, but never did so. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.l:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.i-1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
