 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08873 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Maurice Arcadier, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations by demonstrating that his delinquent debts have been paid or resolved. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 24, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), along with documents 
 
2 
 
 
identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on August 5, 2016. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Through counsel, Applicant submitted a response on August 
26, 2016 with documentation. He did not object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR 
and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 
are admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s FORM response and the 
attachments provided with it are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E and are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all four Guideline F allegations in the SOR, with explanations. I 
have incorporated his answers and relevant comments into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He and his wife have three children, ages 18, 21 and 23. 
Applicant has worked in the defense industry for the same employer since 1986. He has 
had a clearance for his entire career.1 Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application (SCA) in September 2015. He disclosed on his SCA that he had financial 
delinquencies.2  
 
 The SOR concerns four delinquent accounts. Two of them are credit card or 
consumer accounts, and two of them are past-due student loans. They are found on 
Applicant’s February 2016 credit report.3 Applicant admitted each debt in his answer, with 
explanations but no documents. He provided additional explanations, and supporting 
documentation, with his FORM response.  
 
The current status of the debts is as follows:  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a is a $19,615 debt that has been charged off by a bank. Applicant 
indicates that the debt occurred when his wife assumed some of their daughter’s 
expenses after she became pregnant, and fell behind on other debts, including this one. 
Applicant paid this debt with funds from his 401(k) account. The Government’s own 
evidence indicates (and Department Counsel acknowledges in his brief) that the debt was 
paid and resolved before the SOR was issued.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b is a consumer account that is past due for $5,040. Applicant indicates 
that he negotiated a settlement for $4,032 and that his wife paid about $2,600 towards 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3, 5.  
 
2  Items 2, 5.  
 
3 Item 4.  
 
4  Item 4; AE A.  
 
3 
 
 
the debt in February 2015. Upon learning more recently that the account remained 
outstanding, Applicant took steps to pay the remaining balance, of about $1,422.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($2,024) and 1.d ($1,024) are two past-due student loans. Applicant’s 
daughter accepts responsibility for them in an affidavit. The accounts are also in good 
standing.6 
 
 Applicant also indicates that his finances are sound. He indicates that he has a 
monthly income of about $8,000, and monthly expenses of about $4,000. His only current 
debt obligations are his mortgage and a car payment, which are about $1,250 per month 
combined. Having worked for his employer for over 30 years, he indicates that he has a 
vested pension of over $500,000.7 Applicant has received numerous certificates of 
achievement and recognition throughout his career.8    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
5 FORM Response, AE B.  
 
6 FORM Response, AE A, AE C.  
 
7 FORM Response.  
 
8 AE E.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.9 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are established by the record. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant and his wife fell behind on their debts after their daughter became 
pregnant. Applicant has shown that he undertook responsible action to resolve the debts, 
and he has provided documentation that they all have now been paid or are in good 
standing. Applicant’s credit reports establish that his finances have improved. His 
financial issues are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) all apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
6 
 
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old man who has spent most of his adult life as a cleared 
employee of a defense contractor. He accrued some delinquent debts after his daughter 
became pregnant. Once he became aware of the debts, he took timely and responsible 
steps to pay and resolve them. The largest debt was resolved before the SOR was issued. 
He has a reliable financial track record. His finances are no longer a security concern. He 
has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
