1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 15-08393 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her eligibility 
for a public trust position. Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concern based on her 
personal conduct. She did not, however present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from her problematic financial 
condition. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on June 3, 2015. About ten months later on March 29, 2016, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, 
sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct.1 The SOR 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Jan. 1987), as amended 
2 
 
is similar to a complaint.  Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2016, and requested 
a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On May 19, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM).2  Included in the FORM were five items of evidence, items one 
through four of which are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 1 through 4. 
The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on May 31, 2016. Applicant’s 
response to the FORM was due on June 30, 2016.  Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The FORM includes Exhibit 5, which is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the September 2015 background 
investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.3 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s 
failure to respond to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and 
voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also 
does not demonstrate that she understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 5 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.    
  
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is 46 years old and at the time of her SF 86 she had been employed 
since June 2014 as a customer service representative for a health-care contractor to the 
Defense Department. She has her high school equivalency and some community college 
credits. She has one grown son from her first marriage and two sons (19 and 15) from 
her current marriage. Applicant is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public 
trust for her current job responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary, because her job involves 
access to sensitive but unclassified information.  
 
  
                                                          
(Regulation. In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were 
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process. Judge Ra’anan raises a number of pertinent questions 
about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$16,600.  Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose those delinquent debts in her SF 86. Applicant’s answer to the SOR admitted all 
but one alleged debt (an educational loan).4  That delinquent debt is, however, supported 
by the record.5  Applicant’s answer explained that she was unaware of the delinquent 
debts, because her spouse was in the military and in charge of the family finances. She 
further explained that her financial state is one of the reasons she is separated from her 
husband and seeking divorce, so she can become financially stable. She provided no 
evidence, however, that she has paid or attempted to pay any of the SOR debts. 
 
Under Guideline E it is undisputed that Applicant did not disclose her delinquent 
debts in her SF 86.  Applicant, however, denied that she falsified her SF 86.  She 
reiterated that she was unaware of the delinquent debts, because her spouse kept that 
information from her. Applicant claims that she first learned of her delinquent debts during 
her personal subject interview in September 2015.   
 
 Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Exhibit 2 (SOR para. 1.l. ($4,616)). 
 
5 Exhibit 4.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,6 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information.7 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
                                                          
6 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
condition sufficient to raise a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F.  She appears to 
be unable to pay her debts, thus triggering AG ¶ 19(a) & (c).  Even if I credit Applicant’s 
claim that her indebtedness was kept from her by her spouse whom she is in the process 
of divorcing, which I do, she has known since her September 2015 interview about the 
delinquent debts.8 Yet she provided no documents showing payments or efforts to pay 
any of the SOR debts. A trustworthiness adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant's debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.9  
 
 The record demonstrates Applicant’s inability to satisfy her debts. Even if I 
conclude that Applicant’s separation and divorce are conditions largely beyond her 
control, a partially mitigating factor under AG ¶ 20(b), the record does not indicate that 
she has acted responsibly as to her debts, that the problem is being resolved, is under 
control, or that Applicant has made good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.   
 
 Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about [a person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect [sensitive] information.”10 A statement is false or dishonest when it is 
made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material 
information is not deliberate if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has held that inattention to family finances can be reason to question an applicant’s 
judgment. ISCR Case No. 13-00786 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2014).  The instant case, however, appears 
not to involve inattention but reflects an effort by Applicant’s spouse to keep Applicant in the dark about 
the family finances.   
 
9 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).   
 
10 AG ¶ 15.   
6 
 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the 
information, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for her failure to disclose her delinquent debts in her SF 86 
is that she was unaware at the time of the existence of those debts.  She was unaware, 
she claims, because her spouse kept that information from her.  She admitted those debts 
in her answer to the SOR and claims she is now in the process of divorcing her spouse, 
in part because of the financial straits he has put her in.  I find this to be a plausible 
explanation, one that is not rebutted by any Government evidence.  I find that Applicant’s 
failure to disclose her debts in her SF 86 was not deliberate.  
 
The record creates doubt about Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant her eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a - q:           Against Applicant 
 
            Paragraph 2, Guideline E                           For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.                                      For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
