 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05243 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 28, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on eight debts, in a total exceeding $16,000. 
In 2003, he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was discharged in 2007. Applicant failed 
to introduce documentation to show that his history of financial delinquencies does not 
cast doubt on his current judgment. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On March 23, 2016, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 16, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
19, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on October 13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 20, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I 
and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted two exhibits (AE) marked AE A and AE B. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE A and AE B, and they were admitted. The record was left open for 
receipt of additional documentation. On December 29, 2016, Applicant submitted 
additional exhibits via mail and fax, marked AE C through AE L. Department Counsel 
had no objections to AE C through AE L, and they were admitted. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 9, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He has been an employee of a government contractor 
since 2014. Applicant is married, and has three children. He served in the Army for 23 
years, and honorable retired in July 2013. He achieved the rank of Master Sergeant, E-
8. (GE 1; Tr. 19-21.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on eight debts, in a 
total exceeding $16,000. The SOR also alleged he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
February 2003, which was discharged in December 2007. Applicant admitted SOR 
allegations 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i. He denied subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h. 
His debts are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 4; GE 
5; GE 6.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his current financial delinquencies to events beyond his 
control. His wife was hospitalized and could not work due to an unstated injury at an 
undisclosed time. He also was unemployed for a year after his retirement from the Army 
in 2013. He relied on credit cards during that time to pay his bills and meet his monthly 
expenses. (Tr. 33-36.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a medical creditor on a collection account in the amount 
of $12, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant testified that he paid this debt. (Tr. 24-25.) 
However, he submitted nothing to substantiate his claim. This debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$8,097, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant testified this debt was for a vehicle he 
purchased in his name in 2007. It was assigned to his ex-wife in his divorce settlement 
agreement. She stopped paying for the vehicle and it went into collections. (Tr. 24, 26-
27.) Applicant failed to document his claims. This debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$1,115, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt was for a credit card that became delinquent 
in 2012. Applicant stated in his post-hearing documentation that “Final payment was 
 
3 
 
made on 12/31/14 for a total of $1,115.56.” (GE 4; AE D; AE G; Tr. 27.) However, he 
failed to introduce documentation to substantiate his claim. This debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$349, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant stated in his post-hearing documentation that 
“Final payment was made on 12/18/14 for a total of $400.28.” (AE D; AE G; Tr. 27-28.) 
Applicant presented a letter from the collection agent that verified this account was paid 
in full. It is resolved. (AE H.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$8,097, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant testified he did not know what this debt was 
for. He has not tried to contact the creditor. It is unresolved. (Tr. 28-30.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$3,177, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant stated in his post-hearing documentation that 
“Final payment was made on 2/13/15 for a total of $2,910.56.” (AE D; AE G; Tr. 30-31.) 
Applicant presented a letter from a collection agent for this creditor, which showed this 
debt as “settled.” (AE J.) It is resolved. 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the approximate 
amount of $1,632, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant testified this debt was his “son’s 
credit card that I had to co-sign for.” Applicant testified that the bank no longer exists 
and he does not know why currently holds the collection account. It is unresolved. (Tr. 
31-32.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the approximate 
amount of $288, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant stated in his post-hearing 
documentation that “Final payment was made on 11/21/14 for a total of $289.” (AE D; 
AE G; Tr. 32.) Applicant presented a letter from a collection agent for this creditor, which 
showed this debt as “settled-in-full.” (AE I.) It is resolved.  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in February 2003. He identified $37,387 in 
liabilities and $14,300 in assets at the time he filed for Chapter 13. His bankruptcy was 
successfully discharged in December 2007. He attributed bankruptcy filing to “financial 
mismanagement on both our parts,” referring to himself and his ex-wife. (GE 2; Tr. 22, 
32-33.) 
  
 Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
He testified that he lives within his means and does not buy extravagant things. 
However, in May 2016, he financed a $19,000 motorcycle despite having multiple 
unresolved debts. Applicant has not attended any financial counseling. (Tr. 34-37.) 
 
 Applicant presented a letters of recommendation from four individuals who know 
him. Applicant’s father-in-law opined that Applicant has “exceptional integrity and 
honor.” His city councilman wrote that Applicant is “dependable, level headed, 
hardworking, honest, patriotic, and principled.” A director with whom Applicant works 
indicated Applicant is a team player and is always “willing to go the extra mile.” A friend 
 
4 
 
and co-worker of Applicant’s indicated Applicant is “very respectful of privacy, classified 
information, rules and restrictions.” (AE F.) Applicant’s counseling records and 
performance plans shows that he meets all requirements and is a valued employee. (AE 
K.) He has successfully completed numerous training courses related to his filed of work 
and security training. (AE L.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He failed to document he 
resolved five of his eight delinquencies. Further, he has a history of financial 
delinquencies since at least 2003, when he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. While that 
bankruptcy was discharged, Applicant failed to change his practice of spending funds 
that he did not have. The evidence raises security concerns under all of these 
disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a long history of 
delinquencies. He discharged a substantial amount of debt in 2007 through bankruptcy. 
However, he again defaulted on new debts shortly after that discharge. Five of 
Applicant’s alleged eight delinquent accounts remain unresolved. Yet, he recently 
procured a loan for a $19,000 motorcycle. He has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed his recent delinquencies to his unemployment and his wife’s 
hospitalization. These are circumstances beyond his control, although the duration of 
his wife’s hospitalization is unknown. However, he failed to establish that he has acted 
reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts since becoming fully employed with 
a government contractor in 2014. He has not demonstrated that he addressed his debts 
in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one with regard to any of his 
debts. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
performs well at work and is trusted by those who wrote him reference letters. However, 
Applicant’s debts remain largely unresolved. While he was given the opportunity to 
document the current status of his debts, he failed to produce evidence of any actions 
on his remaining five delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
