 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02506 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jessica L. Craven, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has resolved any security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations due to unfiled local tax returns. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 20, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The Government submitted 
 
2 
 
 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and he 
received it on June 28, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Through counsel, Applicant filed 
an initial FORM response on July 21, 2016. It consists of four pages of exhibits, marked 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. On July 29, 2016, Applicant’s counsel submitted an additional 
FORM Response, consisting of a letter from Applicant and several attachments, some 
with subparts, numbered 1-15. This submission is marked AE B. On October 17, 2016, 
Applicant, acting pro se, submitted an additional letter and exhibit, which is marked AE 
C. Applicant’s exhibits are admitted into evidence without objection. Items 1 and 2 are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation with an explanation and documents. I 
have incorporated his answer and relevant comments into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He worked a federal agency and its inspector general’s 
office from 1991 until July 2012, when he retired. He was unemployed or self-employed 
until April 2013. Since then, he has worked as an investigator for a federal defense 
contractor. Applicant is married. He and his wife have three grown children.1 
 
 Applicant has lived for many years in City 1, State 1. The inspector general’s office, 
where he was based beginning in 2005, is in a city in a neighboring state, City 2, State 2. 
He was required to pay income taxes to City 2 while he was employed in an office there.2   
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in March 2014. He 
disclosed that between 2005 and 2012, he had failed to file and pay his City 2 income 
taxes. He stated that when he moved to the inspector general’s office, he failed to have 
his employer deduct City 2 taxes from his pay. He reported that between 2008 and 2011, 
he had paid the past-due city taxes for all prior tax years. His City 2 taxes for tax years 
2011 and 2012 remained outstanding because he could not afford to pay them. Applicant 
acknowledged in his SCA and in two background interviews that the matter remained 
unresolved.3 Applicant’s failure to file these returns is alleged as SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Answer.  
 
3 Items 3, 4, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In his Answer, Applicant explains that 2011 was a year of particular strain and 
turmoil for his marriage and for his daughter. Applicant, his wife and daughter entered 
marital and family counseling, and their inter-family relationships have since improved.4  
 
  When he retired in July 2012, Applicant received a lump-sum payment for his 
outstanding annual leave. He used that money for household and other expenses to 
provide for his family until his retirement pay began. Applicant was also expecting to 
receive a “catch-up” check of about $7,500 once his retirement pay was calculated. He 
intended to pay his City 2 taxes when he received the “catch-up” check. He could not 
afford to pay them with other funds at the time.5  
 
Applicant took no further action on his outstanding City 2 taxes until November 
2015, after he confessed to friends that they remained unresolved. When his friends 
challenged him to act, Applicant contacted tax relief specialists. On May 31, 2016, he paid 
City 2 past due taxes of $4,393 for 2011 and 2012.6  
 
Applicant believed for several years that he had never received the “catch-up” 
check. He inquired about the matter with the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), and also sought congressional assistance, both without apparent success.7 In 
October 2016, an OPM representative reviewed his records and confirmed that, in fact, 
Applicant did receive his “catch up” check in November 2012, for about $4,800. Applicant 
confirmed with his bank that the money was deposited at that time, though he did not 
notice it. Applicant clarified the record in this case by submitting the relevant 
documentation with his October 2016 FORM Response and expressed remorse for his 
errors.8 
  
 The Government’s evidence does not include any documents from City 2 
concerning the filing responsibilities of an individual taxpayer within City 2’s jurisdiction. 
Applicant’s 2011 and 2012 City 2 tax returns themselves are also not in the record. 
Applicant’s initial FORM Response includes a July 19, 2016 e-mail from a City 2 
government employee. It states in part, that: 
  
[Applicant] paid [City 2] in full his back taxes owed for the 2011 and 2012 
tax years. The City is in the process of scanning tax filings for the past year, 
which includes the tax forms for [Applicant]. It may be some time before 
                                                          
4 Answer 
 
5 Answer, AE A. 
 
6 AE A.  
 
7 Items 3, 4, 5, Answer, AE A, AE B.  
 
8 AE C.  
 
 
4 
 
 
[Applicant’s] tax forms are scanned. When [Applicant’s] forms are scanned 
the city will be able to provide copies of the forms.9   
 
Even this e-mail does not specifically indicate that Applicant had an affirmative 
duty to file tax returns with City 2 for 2011 or 2012, even if he owed taxes for those years. 
The only evidence that Applicant had such a duty to file comes from Applicant himself, in 
his SCA, his two interviews and in his Answer. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
9 AE A.  
 
5 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required 
or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has consistently explained that when he joined the inspector general’s 
office in 2005, he failed to have his employer deduct City 2 taxes from his pay. It is not 
actually clear from the record whether this was actually Applicant’s responsibility, or his 
employer’s. When he learned several years later that he owed city taxes, he took 
appropriate steps to pay them. He disclosed the issue on his March 2014 SCA, and 
acknowledged that two tax years remained unresolved. 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant failed to file City 2 tax returns for 2011 and 
2012, and that the returns remain unfiled as of the date of the SOR. The text of the SOR 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
allegation, however, does not actually include the phrase “as required” (unlike the text of 
AG ¶ 19(g), which does). Applicant admits the allegation and acknowledges that he 
should have had City 2 taxes deducted from his pay beginning in 2005, when he began 
to work in a new office – an office located in City 2 (in a state where Applicant did not 
live). However, the Government presents no documentary evidence from City 2 tax 
authorities that Applicant was responsible for filing such a return. Notwithstanding 
Applicant’s admission, there is insufficient evidence to support the sole allegation in this 
case – that Applicant had an affirmative duty to file tax returns with City 2 each year he 
worked there, and that any such failure to do so constitutes a security concern. 
 
 I therefore cannot find that AG ¶ 19(g) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. The resulting past 
due tax debt, of about $4,393, was not alleged, and in any event has now been paid. 
 
Since disqualifying conditions have not been met, it is unnecessary to address 
potential mitigating conditions. However, I note that Applicant disclosed the matter in 
some detail on his SCA, and, after seeking appropriate tax and legal advice, he has now 
paid the past-due taxes owed for all prior years. He no longer works in City 2. I conclude 
that Applicant’s circumstances are unusual and unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant pursued 
appropriate counseling and acted on the advice he was given to cure the issue. There 
are clear indications that the matter has been resolved. If disqualifying conditions had 
been shown, AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (c) would apply in mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old retired federal employee. He failed to have his then-
employer deduct city taxes from his pay after he changed jobs and began working out of 
an office in a new location in a neighboring state. He has cured the issue and paid the 
past-due taxes owed. Given the nature of the tax issues in this case, Applicant is unlikely 
to find himself in this position again, and the risk of recurrence is low. There is no known 
issue with either his state or federal tax filings. His local tax issues are resolved and are 
not a security concern. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has resolved any security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
