 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-04690 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of failure pay his Federal income taxes. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on July 14, 2014. On May 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 12, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
August 2, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 17, 2016, setting 
the hearing date for December 7, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, but offered no documentary evidence. I granted his 
request to leave the record open until January 10, 2017, to permit him to submit such 
evidence. He did not submit any additional evidence, and the record closed as scheduled. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 17, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a Federal contractor, where he has worked 
in various positions since 1979. He is a high school graduate. He has no military service, 
and has never held a security clearance. He is married, for the second time, and has two 
adult children. (GE 1; Tr. 6-8, 33-36.) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s admissions, including those made during two 
interviews with investigators from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), are 
incorporated in the following findings. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant has a long history of failing to pay required income taxes, which he 
attributed to earnings from working overtime and unpaid taxes on profits from his wife’s 
hair salon business. Federal and state tax liens have been filed against him dating back to 
2003. The SOR alleged two Federal income tax liens filed in December 2013 and 
February 2010. The 2013 lien involved $49,350 in unpaid taxes for tax years 2010 and 
2011. The 2010 lien involved $41,255 in unpaid taxes for tax years 2003 to 2008. (GE 1 
through GE 6; Tr. 39-49, 56.) 
 
 Applicant provided no documentary evidence concerning his tax payment history 
or the current status of his delinquent taxes. He testified that he took out a loan from his 
401(k) retirement fund to make payments to the IRS for some of these debts. He said that 
he wrote two checks, for a total of $56,755, to the IRS in March 2015, and has been 
making payments through monthly payroll deductions of $740 since then. The most 
recent record credit report shows that the 2010 tax lien was released in April 2015, but the 
2013 lien remains in effect. (GE 3; GE 6; Tr. 39-42.)  
 
 On September 17, 2010, Applicant told an OPM investigator that he was in the 
process of refinancing the home that he owns, to obtain funds to pay off his total tax debt. 
In 2012 he moved out of that home, which has since remained vacant while he and his 
wife live in a different house that is owned by her family. During his March 25, 2015 
interview, he told another OPM investigator that he was in the process of selling the 
vacant home in order to pay his remaining Federal and state tax debts. During his 
 
 
3 
 
 
hearing, Applicant testified that he was unsure whether he would sell the home or keep it 
as a rental property after he completed necessary repairs and remodeling improvements. 
(GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 34, 44, 54-59.)      
   
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling, or other actions to improve 
his financial responsibility or compliance with his income tax obligations. He submitted no 
evidence of good character or responsible conduct in his professional or personal 
capacities. Although he was given more than a month after the hearing to submit 
documentation concerning his current account payment status with the IRS, he failed to 
submit any evidence to corroborate his testimony. (Tr. 67-69.) 
     
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility, dating back at least to the 2010 
tax lien for his failure to pay income taxes that came due from 2003 through 2008, and 
continuing to date with respect to his recent delinquent Federal tax debt. His irresponsible 
financial history involving more than $90,000 in unpaid Federal income taxes, and his 
inability or unwillingness to repay that debt, raise security concerns under the above 
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 Applicant’s financial problems are extensive, ongoing, and arose from years of 
disregard for his lawful income tax obligations to the Federal Government. They continue 
to reflect irresponsibility, unreliability, and poor judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not 
provide mitigation of the security concerns. There is insufficient evidence that he 
participated in effective financial counseling, or that his financial problems are under 
control. Thus, he failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). His undocumented 
assertion that he has entered into a payment agreement with the IRS, covering an 
unknown quantity of tax debt for undetermined years, did not occur until at least 2015. 
This action, which came after submission of his e-QIP and most recent OPM interview, 
did not demonstrate good faith or establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant did not 
dispute the legitimacy of his delinquent tax debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He 
is responsible for the choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns expressed 
in the SOR, including more than a decade of failure to pay required income taxes. He did 
not present an effective current plan for addressing his substantial remaining debt, or 
establish a record of recent compliance with income tax obligations, either of which could 
demonstrate rehabilitation and behavioral change. The likelihood that similar problems 
will recur remains a security issue, and the potential for untrustworthiness, pressure, 
coercion, or duress is undiminished. He has a lengthy history of financial irresponsibility, 
and there is insufficient evidence to suggest that his situation or conduct are likely to 
improve. Overall, the record evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant=s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
