 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00441 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns stemming from his financial 
problems and falsification. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 21, 2015, and he elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 24, 2016, 
Department Counsel submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a 
complete copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on April 5, 2016. He was 
afforded an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
He did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 8, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.1 FORM Item 3 
consists of an unauthenticated summary of an interview with a government investigator 
conducted on April 18, 2013. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that 
he could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate.  
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by 
me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given 
Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s work experience, I find his waiver to 
be knowing and intelligent.2 FORM Items 2-5 are admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits 2-5, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 1), two falsifications (SOR ¶¶ 
2.a. and 2.b.), and a 2009 criminal charge (SOR ¶ 2.c.). In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant did not explicitly admit any of the allegations. Absent clear admissions, I 
construe Applicant’s response to the SOR as denying all of the allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He graduated from high school in 1988, and he 
attended some undergraduate-level classes in 2005. He served on active duty in the 
U.S. military from April 1992 to June 1998, when he received a medical discharge. 
Since March 2000, he has been gainfully employed full time as an engineer for several 
different federal contractors. He has been married and divorced three times, with his 
most recent divorce in November 2012.3 
 
 In March 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA), 
wherein he listed an August 2009 criminal charge for solicitation. The charge resulted in 
a fine and suspended sentence, but no conviction. On the SCA, he denied any 
delinquent debts, collection accounts, unpaid judgments, or charged-off debts, in 
response to the following questions: 
 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR, which are pleadings and are 
entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 2; GE 3. 
 
3 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had a judgment entered against 
you? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?4 
 
 Applicant’s March 2013 and June 2014 credit reports establish the eight alleged 
debts, which became delinquent between 2010 and 2012. During his April 2013 security 
interview, he attributed his delinquent debts to living beyond his means and being 
irresponsible with his finances. He averred that he would hire a credit counseling serve 
and resolve his debts by the end of 2013, though there is no evidence that he engaged 
such services.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant claimed the judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e.) was 
paid through a garnishment and to have made payment arrangements on another 
account (SOR ¶ 1.h.), but he provided no documentation to substantiate these claims. 
Similarly, he denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.g. and disputed liability on the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.f. These debts are listed on the credit reports that were forwarded 
to him with the FORM. He provided no documentation to substantiate his disputes or to 
show any debt-resolution efforts or payments.5 
 
 During his April 2013 security interview, Applicant also admitted to soliciting a 
prostitute, resulting in the charge, fine, and suspended sentence in 2009.  When 
confronted by the government investigator, he admitted that he was aware of his 
financial problems. He claimed that he was rushed when he completed the SCA and did 
not have the specific account information with him at the time. He was not aware that a 
judgment had been filed (SOR ¶ 1.c), but he was aware of some of the alleged 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) including a vehicle repossession and more 
generally that he had financial problems.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 GE 2. 
 
5 Response to SOR; GE 3-5. 
 
 6 GE 3. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s eight delinquent debts total approximately $30,226. These debts 
became delinquent between 2010 and 2012. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial struggles date from 2010 and are ongoing. There is no 
evidence of any steps to resolve the eight alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to 
living beyond his means and financial irresponsibility. He has not established that his 
financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and he has not 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
6 
 
provided evidence of a debt-resolution plan and efforts in furtherance of a plan. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply.   
 
Applicant expressed an intent to consult a credit counseling service, but there is 
no evidence that he actually engaged such services. There is also no evidence that his 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”8 
Applicant claims to have satisfied the alleged judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e.), but there is no 
documentation of any payments or debt-resolution efforts on this debt or the other 
alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant did not supply evidence to substantiate his claims denying the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h. Absent such evidence and substantial 
evidence of debt-resolution efforts and financial responsibility, I find that security 
concerns about Applicant’s financial problems remain. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges personal conduct concerns about two 
falsifications on Applicant’s 2013 SCA and his 2009 criminal charge. The following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all information supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
7 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.9  
 
On his March 2013 SCA, Applicant denied having any judgments, charged-off 
debts, or collection accounts. During his April 2013 security interview, he admitted that 
he was generally aware of his financial problems, including the delinquent credit card 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) and the vehicle repossession (SOR ¶ 1.b.). He claimed that he was 
unaware of the judgment (SOR ¶ 1.c.) and the remaining delinquent debts and that he 
rushed completing the SCA without obtaining the necessary account information at the 
time. Nonetheless, Applicant did not disclose any information about his delinquent debts 
on his SCA, either under Section 26 or under Additional Comments, and failed to put 
the Government on notice about potential financial concerns. Applicant certified his SCA 
as true, accurate, and complete while aware that he had not disclosed his financial 
delinquencies. Because Applicant was unaware of the judgment, Department Counsel 
did not establish a deliberate falsification as to SOR ¶ 2.a. However, because Applicant 
was aware of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., Department Counsel did establish a 
deliberate falsification as to SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
In 2009, Applicant solicited a prostitute and was charged. He was fined and 
received a suspended sentence. AG ¶ 16(d) applies. 
 
 The Government established security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to demonstrate mitigation. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or such much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant attempted prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct these omissions following the submission of his SCA prior to being confronted 
during his April 2013 security interview. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 Significant time has passed since Applicant’s criminal conduct in 2009. AG ¶ 
17(c) applies. Applicant mitigated the security concerns stemming from his 2009 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
criminal conduct, but personal conduct security concerns remain as to the falsifications 
on his SCA. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from living beyond his means and 
financial irresponsibility. He has not provided any documentary evidence of debt-
resolution efforts or payments. He knowingly omitted delinquent debts on his SCA, and 
he has not provided evidence of reform and rehabilitation. As a result, the totality of the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 2.b.    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
