1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06009 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jon Levin, Esq. 
W. Brad English, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant has paid or resolved some of his past-due debts. Nonetheless, available 
information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about his other unresolved 
debts and by his failure to comply with his federal and state income tax obligations. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On November 18, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 
 
 On March 9, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 I received this case on September 26, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on November 15, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.3 Applicant testified in his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - J. Two witnesses also appeared for Applicant. I 
held the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant to submit additional relevant 
information. The record closed on December 5, 2016, when I received, as Ax. K 
Applicant’s timely post-hearing submission.4 All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 22, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant failed to timely file his 
federal income tax returns for the tax years 2009 through 2014 (SOR 1.a); that he failed 
to timely file his state income tax returns for the tax years 2009 through 2014 (SOR 1.b); 
that he failed to timely file his state income tax return in a second state for the tax year 
2009 (SOR 1.c); and that he owes $14,084 for 15 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.d 
– 1.r).  
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations, and he provided 
information showing he had paid the debts alleged at SOR 1.d – 1.l. He also provided 
remarks and explanations along with his answers. At hearing, Applicant provided 
information that refuted the allegation at SOR 1.c, and Department Counsel withdrew that 
allegation. SOR 1.c, and 1.d – 1.l are resolved for Applicant. (Ax. J) 
 
 Additionally, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the 
information produced at hearing.5 I granted that motion. The amendments are as follows: 
SOR 1.a and 1.b now address the tax years 2009 through 2015. Two new SOR 
allegations have been added. The Government alleged as SOR 1.s, “You [Applicant] are 
indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for income taxes due, for tax years 2009 – 2015, 
in the approximate amount of $25,375.” The Government also alleged, as SOR 1.t, “You 
[Applicant] are indebted to the State of Alabama for income taxes due, for tax years 2009, 
                                                 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s letter forwarding Gx. 1- 4 to Applicant in advance of hearing is included 
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
4 Ax. K consists of updated information pertaining to Applicant’s IRS and state tax obligations, as well as 
an updated and signed copy of the student loan repayment agreement contained in Ax. J. Department 
Counsel’s email forwarding Ax. K and waiving objection thereto is included as Hx. 2. 
 
5 See Directive E3.1.17. 
3 
 
2011, 2013, and 2014, in the approximate amount of $1,531.” Applicant, through counsel, 
did not object to the motion and I amended the SOR accordingly. Applicant admitted the 
amended allegations and the new allegations. (Answer; Hx. 2; Tr. 61 - 64) In addition to 
the facts established by the pleadings, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He twice has been married and divorced, his more recent 
marriage ending in May 2013. After graduating from high school, Applicant served on 
active duty for two years in the United States Army, then served on inactive duty with the 
Army Reserve until 1994, when he was honorably discharged. Between 2006 and 2007, 
Applicant attended a technical training school where, although he did not earn a degree, 
he earned various information technology (IT) certifications. Applicant was unemployed 
between June and October 2014, but otherwise has been steadily employed in IT 
positions with several companies since at least December 2006. He has been with his 
current company, first as a temporary employee, then as a permanent hire, since October 
2014. (Gx. 1) 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on April 13, 2015, 
he was confronted with several, previously undisclosed, delinquent student loans that 
were listed in a December 2014 credit report. Those debts are alleged at SOR 1.o – 1.r 
and total $9,657. Applicant thought he only owed about $5,000. He was paying the loans 
as required while still in school, but he stopped paying after he left school in 2007. In the 
summer of 2016, Applicant contacted the firm to whom the debts had been referred for 
collection. On November 16, 2016, Applicant enrolled in a student loan rehabilitation 
program that requires him to pay $184 each month on a balance due of $7,005.45 for two 
of his delinquent student loans. His first payment was due in mid-December 2016. (Gx. 2 
– 4; Ax. J; Ax. K; Tr. 30 – 31, 45 – 46, 57 - 58) 
 
 In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he did not file his federal or state income tax 
returns for 2009, 2012, 2013, and 2014. During his April 2015 interview, Applicant 
disclosed that, in addition to not filing for those years he listed in his e-QIP, he also had 
not filed his federal and state tax returns for 2010 and 2011. As of the interview, the 
deadline for filing his tax year 2014 returns had not arrived. In his April 2016 response to 
the SOR, Applicant stated that he was about to file his returns for the 2015 tax year. 
Applicant did not, as it turns out, timely file his federal or state income tax returns for 2014 
and 2015, as shown by the tax returns he presented at his hearing. Applicant filed those 
returns in September 2016. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A – H; Tr. 20 – 23, 53 - 58) 
 
 Applicant’s stated reason, in his e-QIP and during his interview, for not filing his 
tax returns was that he had always received a refund of overpaid taxes each year. In his 
e-QIP, he stated his concern that refunds would be diverted to satisfy an unspecified  
past-due debt. However, the tax returns he presented at his hearing show that, as alleged 
in SOR 1.s and 1.t, he owes in excess of $25,000 in unpaid federal income tax for 2009 
through 2015, and about $1,500 as alleged in SOR 1.t. On November 10, 2016, he paid 
the IRS $485 toward the $3,529 he owed for 2010. On November 18, 2016, the IRS 
agreed to accept $600 monthly payments from Applicant to satisfy a total debt of 
$25,480.61 for the 2009 through 2015 tax years. Penalties and interest will continue to 
4 
 
accrue until the debt is satisfied. Applicant’s first payment was due in late December 2016. 
(Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. K) 
 
 Applicant also suffers from a neurological autoimmune disorder that requires 
frequent medical treatments and evaluations. The debts alleged at SOR 1.d – 1.l 
represent past-due co-payments and bills for recurring services not covered by his 
medical insurance. Applicant established that he paid those debts between April 2014 
and September 2016. (Answer; Ax. J; Tr. 36 – 39, 43 - 44) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.m is for an unpaid utility bill from late 2008, when Applicant 
briefly lived in a different state. Applicant let a friend open the account using Applicant’s 
information. During his April 2014 interview, he acknowledges responsibility for the debt. 
He has the means to pay the debt but has not done so. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 42) 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt at SOR 1.n. The creditor is a landlord from whom 
Applicant rented an apartment in 2007. The landlord has since died and his son made a 
claim against Applicant for $3,346 in unpaid rent. Applicant denies owing the debt and 
has not heard from the landlord’s son since 2009. This debt does not appear on the most 
recent credit report produced by the Government. (Answer; Gx. 2 – 4; Tr. 41 - 49)   
  
 Applicant has not received any financial counseling or other professional 
assistance with his finances. He claims his current finances are sound, but he did not 
provide any detailed information about his current income and expenses. Applicant’s 
security manager and his second wife testified that Applicant is trustworthy and a valued 
employee, who loves his work and has worked consistently despite his medical problems. 
Applicant is active in his community and serves as a youth mentor. (Tr. 39 – 40, 45, 65 - 
83) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                 
6 See Directive. 6.3. 
5 
 
 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to 
the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one 
has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.8 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the SOR allegations, 
as amended, under this guideline. The facts thus established reasonably raise a security 
concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy   debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income 
                                                 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
9 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
6 
 
is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of 
not meeting financial obligations); and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). Applicant stopped 
filing his federal and state income taxes as required in 2009. As a result, he owes more 
than $26,000 in unpaid federal and state income taxes. He also accrued delinquent 
student loans debts when he left school and stopped paying his loans in 2007. None of 
his tax debts or his student loans have been paid or resolved.  
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant paid the medical debts at SOR 1.e – 1.l shortly after receiving the SOR. 
He had already paid the medical debt at SOR 1.d in 2014. These debts are modest 
recurring expenses attributable to his ongoing medical treatment for his autoimmune 
condition. AG ¶¶  20(a) and 20(d) apply to these debts. However, he has not sufficiently 
addressed his remaining delinquent debts. Although he disputes the debt for past-due 
rent at SOR 1.n, he has not supported his dispute with any corroborating documents. The 
debt at SOR 1.m has gone unpaid for over eight years despite Applicant’s apparent ability 
to pay it. Applicant did not address his delinquent student loans until after he received the 
SOR, and he has not yet established a reliable record of payments through a recently 
executed rehabilitation plan. Further, Applicant only recently decided he should file and 
pay his federal and state income taxes, which he largely has ignored since 2009. He did 
7 
 
not provide a cogent explanation for not filing his tax returns. Anticipation of a tax refunds 
is not an acceptable excuse for not meeting such a fundamental financial and civic 
obligation. As it happens, Applicant now owes a significant debt for his past-due taxes. 
As of the close of this record, he had not established a reliable record of payments through 
a recently executed repayment plan with the IRS, and has made only one payment on his 
state tax debt. 
 
 Finally, Applicant has not sought financial counseling or other professional 
assistance to resolve his financial problems. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information about his current personal finances from which to conclude that his financial 
problems are under control. In summary, none of the pertinent mitigating conditions under 
this guideline apply. The security concerns about Applicant’s finances remaining 
unresolved. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has an excellent record in the workplace. He also is active in his 
community as a youth mentor and as a volunteer in important charitable work. However, 
his failure to file his income tax returns over a prolonged period, and the absence of a 
meaningful record of actions to address his financial obligations, despite having the 
means to do so, underscore the doubts about his suitability for access to classified 
information raised by the Government’s information. Because protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b, 1.m – 1.r: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
