 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-01740 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). Applicant has mitigated both guideline 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 1, 2013. 
On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 16, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 5, 2017. On January 31, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant’s counsel that the 
hearing was scheduled for March 2, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
2 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted into evidence without objection. I 
appended Government’s request for administrative notice of relevant facts about Jordan 
and Israel to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified at the 
hearing and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through V, which were admitted 
without objection. I appended Applicant’s hearing exhibit list to the record as HE 3 and 
her request for administrative notice of relevant facts about Jordan and Israel as HE 4 
and 5. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until March 24, 2017. I admitted 
Applicant’s timely post-hearing submissions as AE W through GG, and appended her 
post-hearing exhibit lists to the record as HE 6 and 7. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on March 9, 2017. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At hearing, I granted Department Counsel’s motion, without objection, to amend 
the SOR to withdraw paragraphs 2.b through 2.d of the SOR.1  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 51 years old and has no children. In 2000, she divorced her 
Lebanese-national husband of approximately six years.3 Since 2004, she has been 
cohabiting with her partner, a Jordanian national who became a U.S. citizen in March 
2017.4 Applicant received her bachelor’s degree in 1988 and her master’s degree in 
1994, both from U.S. universities.5 Applicant has worked on various contracts with the 
same U.S. Government agency since 2012.6 From 2004 through 2011, she worked 
overseas as a consultant for various non-governmental organizations.7 This is 
Applicant’s first application for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth. In 1994, she acquired Lebanese citizenship 
through her marriage. In March 2017, she renounced it.8 Applicant initially obtained a 
Lebanese passport in 1994 for ease of travel with her husband. After they divorced, she 
renewed the passport several times in order to facilitate official travel to various middle-
                                                          
1 Tr. at 57. 
 
2 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer and SCA (GE 1).  
  
3  At hearing, Applicant testified that she was married in 1994 (Tr. at 31-32), which contradicted the 1991 
date on her SCA. This discrepancy is noted but not material. 
 
4 AE GG. 
 
5 See also AE K and M. 
 
6 See also AE T, Z and AA; and Tr. at 14-15, 36-38. 
 
7 AE T; Tr. at 17, 38-42. 
 
8 AE FF.  
 
 
3 
 
eastern countries required by the non-governmental organizations for whom she 
worked. At that time, her U.S. passport contained Israeli stamps, which restricted or 
complicated her travel. She last travelled on that passport in 2011 and then surrendered 
it to her facility security officer (FSO) in 2012. She has travelled exclusively on her U.S. 
passport since then. Her Lebanese passport expired in 2014, and she has no intent to 
reacquire it or to obtain any other foreign passport.9 
 
Applicant reported on her SCA that her partner co-owned a Jordanian bank 
account, but did not report that she shared any interest in that bank account. She did 
acknowledge at hearing, however, that she shared finances with her partner and that 
she and her partner’s bank accounts were intertwined except for their IRA accounts, 
which they maintain independently.10 Based on these facts and despite her claims to the 
contrary,11 Applicant does maintain an interest in her partner’s Jordanian bank account 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). She testified at hearing that her partner closed that bank account, and 
presented a letter purporting to evince same.12 Recognizing that there may be words 
lost in translation, the plain language of that letter does not state, in fact, that the bank 
account is closed.13 Applicant does not maintain her own bank accounts in Jordan or 
any other foreign country.14 
 
Applicant maintains regular contact with her partner’s siblings, including one 
brother and his wife who are citizens and residents of Jordan and one sister who is a 
Jordanian citizen and resident of Israel (SOR ¶1.e). Applicant does not know whether 
the brother’s self-employment involves either the Jordanian government or military. The 
brother’s wife and the sister are not employed by either the Jordanian or Israeli 
government or military.15 Applicant and her partner regularly travel to visit her partner’s 
siblings in Jordan and Israel (including on occasions when Applicant was travelling for 
work), and on at least one occasion, the brother has visited them in the United States. 
There have also been occasions when the brother and sister have visited Applicant and 
her partner while they were in either France or Spain visiting her partner’s other 
siblings.16 
 
Between 2004 and 2011, when Applicant lived and worked overseas, she 
engaged with numerous foreign nationals professionally. However, she never worked 
                                                          
9 See also Tr. at 15-18, 34-35, 65; AE A 
 
10 Tr. at 33; AE H and I 
 
11 See also Tr. at 21, 63-64. 
 
12 Tr. at 21-22, 54-55, 63-64; GE B. 
 
13 AE B. 
 
14 Tr. at 19. 
 
15 See also Tr. at 44-47. 
 
16 See also Tr. at 49-55. 
 
 
4 
 
directly with foreign governments or foreign entities, nor does she maintain any current 
ties to those foreign nationals.17 Applicant does not currently maintain contact with 
former business acquaintances or friends who are citizens and residents of Jordan, 
Lebanon, Egypt, or Israel.18 Applicant has always complied with reporting requirements 
concerning her foreign contacts and foreign travel.19 
 
Applicant returned to live in the United States with her partner in 2011 to be 
closer to her family and to avail the opportunity for her partner to become a U.S. 
citizen.20 Applicant’s loyalties are not divided.21 She and her partner are financially 
stable, have roots in the United States, and they intend to stay and make their home in 
the United States.22 Applicant owns two homes in the United States, one since 2011 
and one since 2015, in which she maintains equity totaling approximately $218,000.23 
She earns an annual salary of approximately $163,000.24 She maintains two IRA 
accounts worth approximately $230,000.25 Applicant’s mother and two siblings are 
citizens and residents of the United States.26 Her partner, a humanitarian-aid worker, 
was previously employed by a U.S. organization and now consults for non-
governmental organizations based in Switzerland and Germany.27 
 
A reference who has known Applicant for three years regarded her good 
judgment and strong character. Applicant’s supervisor who interacted with her almost 
daily for a year found that she was responsible, trustworthy, and demonstrated sound 
judgment. A friend and former colleague who has known Applicant for many years 
described her as honest, trustworthy, and as having rock solid integrity. None of 
Applicant’s references expressed doubt about her loyalty to the United States.28  
 
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 26-27, 39-42, 43, 64. 
 
18 Tr. at 26-27, 39-42, 48. 
 
19 Tr. at 27. 
 
20 Tr. at 42. 
 
21 Tr. at 25. 
 
22 Tr. at 30. 
 
23 See also AE W, Y, DD, and EE; and Tr. at 55-56.  
 
24 Tr. at 30 and 55. 
 
25 Tr. at 55; AE BB and CC. 
 
26 Her father passed away in 2016 (Tr. at 43.) 
 
27 Tr. at 26 and 32-33. 
 
28 AE V; Tr. at 29-30 
 
 
5 
 
Administrative Notice (Jordan) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Jordan, as outlined in HE 1 and 4 and the documents appended thereto, 
including the following:29 
 
 The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy. 
 
 The United States deeply values its long history of cooperation and friendship 
with Jordan, with which it established diplomatic relations in 1949. 
 
 The Jordanian government continues to infringe on citizens’ privacy rights. 
Impunity remains widespread. The most significant human rights problems are 
restrictions on the freedom of expression, including detention of journalists, which 
limited the ability of citizens and media to criticize government policies and 
officials; citizens’ inability change their government peacefully; and mistreatment 
and allegations of torture by security and government officials. 
 
 The threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan.  
 
 Jordan remains a key U.S. ally in countering terrorism and violent extremist 
ideology. Jordan’s location in a tumultuous region makes it vulnerable to a variety 
of threats, yet also facilitates its regional leadership in confronting them. 
 
 Jordan has advanced capabilities to detect, deter, and prevent terrorism within its 
territory, and has remained committed to securing its borders and denying safe 
haven to terrorists.  
 
 Jordan’s interagency anti-extremist strategy remained under-resourced and 
unstaffed, its leaders are reticent to acknowledge domestic radicalization, 
including self-radicalizations, and its efforts to improve counter-radicalization in 
schools and mosques were rarely well coordinated across government agencies. 
 
Administrative Notice (Israel) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Israel, as outlined in HE 2 and 5 and the documents appended thereto, 
including the following:  
 
 Israel is a multiparty parliamentary democracy. 
 
 For decades, strong bilateral relations have fueled and reinforced significant U.S. 
and Israeli policies in many areas, including regional security. Nonetheless, at 
                                                          
29 Contrary to Applicant’s counsel’s assertion at hearing (Tr. at 12), HE 4 did not contain a request for 
administrative notice with respect to Egypt. 
 
 
6 
 
various point throughout the relationship, U.S. and Israeli polices have diverged 
on some important issues. 
  
 In the past 30 years, there have been at least three cases in which U.S. 
Government employees were convicted of disclosing classified information to 
Israel or of conspiracy to act as an Israeli agent.  Reports indicate that concerns 
regarding possible Israeli espionage persist among U.S. officials. 
 
 Among the most significant human rights problems in Israel are the terrorist 
attacks targeting civilians, and politically and religiously motivated societal 
violence. 
 
 While Israel is a committed counterterrorism partner, it faces terrorist threats from 
Palestinian violent extremists including Hamas, Hizballah, al-Qa’ida and its 
affiliates, and the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It also faces a wave 
of terrorist attacks committed by individuals with no clear organizational 
affiliation. Israeli counterterrorism officials said Hamas and other Gaza terrorists 
made quantitative and qualitative advances in their military capabilities. Israeli 
officials remained concerned about the terrorist threat posed from Iran and the 
proliferation of weapons from Syria to terrorist organizations. 
 
 While Israel is not involved in the Global Coalition to counter ISIL, it shares 
information to help track and stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. Israel has 
a robust legal framework to combat terrorism and promote international legal 
assistance in the investigation and prosecution of terrorists. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns all persons seeking to enter or depart Israel, 
the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to immigration and security screening, 
including prolonged questioning and physical searches. Israeli security officials 
have also on occasion requested access to travelers’ personal e-mail accounts 
or other social media accounts as a condition of entry. In such circumstances, 
travelers should have no expectation of privacy for any data stored on such 
devices or in their accounts.30 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”31 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
30 The document provided in support Item V of HE 2 was incomplete and did not contain any of the facts 
referenced in HE 2. Therefore, I went to the website address provided to obtain a complete document, 
which contained a current version of that document, dated February 21, 2017. The facts cited herein are 
based on facts of the 2017 version that are not materially different from those cited in HE 2.  
 
31 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
 
information.”32 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”33 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”34 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.35 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”36 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.37 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
                                                          
32 Egan at 527. 
 
33 Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
34 Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
35 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
36 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
37 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
8 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.38 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.39 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”40 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”41  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference) 
 
The security concern under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) is set out in AG ¶ 
9, as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 10(a):  exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to:  
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport . . . ; and 
 
AG ¶ 10(b): action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship 
by an American citizen. 
 
Applicant’s dual citizenship is not, by itself, a disqualifying condition.42 Under 
Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but rather whether 
an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”43 Thus, the fact 
that Applicant obtained and maintained a valid Lebanese passport as a U.S. citizen from 
approximately 1994 through 2014 establishes AG ¶ 10(b). Applicant has not been in 
                                                          
38 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
39 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
40 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
41 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
42 ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2000). 
 
43 ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 
9 
 
possession of a current Lebanese passport since 2012. Therefore, AG ¶ 10 (a)(1) is not 
established.  
 
Alternatively, in the event that AG ¶ 10(a)(1) is deemed established, I find that it 
has been mitigated. Applicant submitted a letter to the Lebanese embassy renouncing 
her Lebanese citizenship, which establishes mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(b).44 She 
surrendered her Lebanese passport to her FSO in 2012, which establishes mitigating 
condition AE ¶ 11(e).45 Further, she had not used that passport since 2011 and it 
expired in 2014. As the Government conceded at hearing,46 the concerns alleged in the 
SOR under Guideline C are mitigated. Therefore, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.a in favor of 
Applicant. 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information;  
 
                                                          
44 AG ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship). 
 
45 AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated). 
 
46 Tr. at 66. 
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s direct ties to her partner’s siblings who are citizens and residents of 
Jordan and Israel establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), and her indirect ties to them through 
her partner establish AG ¶ 7(d). Although potentially applicable given Applicant’s shared 
interest in her partner’s Jordanian bank account, AG ¶ 7(e) is not established since the 
value of the account is not substantial as compared to the value of her U.S. assets. 
Given that Applicant does not currently maintain contact with former business 
acquaintances or friends who are citizens and residents of Jordan, Lebanon, Egypt, or 
Israel, SOR ¶ 1.f is not established. The human rights and terrorism problems existent 
in Jordan and Israel, the U.S. Department of State’s security concerns with respect to 
Israel’s infringements on privacy rights, and the concerns regarding Israeli espionage 
against the United States establish a “heightened risk” with respect to both countries.  
 
Application of the guidelines is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.47 Family 
relationships can involve matters of influence or obligation.48 Therefore, Applicant’s 
direct and indirect family ties raise concerns for which she has the burden of persuasion 
to mitigate.49   
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
                                                          
47 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
48 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003). 
 
49 ISCR Case No. 99-0532 at 7 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2000) (When an applicant’s ties in a foreign country 
raise a prima facie security concern, the applicant is required to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation, 
or mitigation sufficient to carry his burden of persuasion that it is “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to grant or continue a security clearance on his behalf). 
 
 
 
11 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. Despite the fact that none of her partner’s siblings 
who reside in and are citizens of Jordan or Israel are affiliated with a foreign 
government or military, Applicant maintains close ties with them directly and through her 
partner. The countries of Jordan and Israel pose a heightened risk.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant attained both of her post-graduate degrees 
from U.S. universities. While she lived abroad for seven years, her work supported non-
governmental organizations. She does not maintain current contact with the foreign 
nationals with whom she interacted professionally during her years overseas. She and 
her partner chose to return to live in the United States in order to be closer to 
Applicant’s family and for her partner to become a U.S. citizen. Neither Applicant nor 
her partner have been employed by or maintain ties with any foreign government or 
entity. Applicant has accumulated significant U.S. assets, and remains gainfully 
employed. Her immediate family are all citizens and residents of the United States. 
Despite their close ties to her partner’s siblings in Jordan and Israel, Applicant and her 
partner’s significant financial interests, plans for their future, and loyalties are in the 
United States. Therefore, I have no doubt that Applicant would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States.  
 
In the event that Applicant’s interest in her partner’s Jordanian bank account is 
deemed sufficient to establish AG ¶ 7(e), it is nominal in value as compared to the 
significant assets that she owns in the United States.  AG ¶ 8(f) is established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
12 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis, and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant was candid, sincere, and 
credible at the hearing. She enjoys a reputation of being responsible and trustworthy, 
among other notable qualities. I have weighed the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guidelines B and C, and evaluated all of the evidence in the context of 
the whole person and the heightened risk associated with Jordan and Israel. I conclude 
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about her Lebanese passport, family 
and assets in Jordan and Israel, and her contact with other foreign nationals. 
Accordingly, I conclude that she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.e, and 2.f: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
