1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06266 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond his control and 
he has acted responsibly in addressing them.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On April 30, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 
 
 On February 24, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 I received this case on September 26, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on November 15, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.3 Applicant testified in his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - F. I also left the record open after the hearing to 
receive additional relevant information from Applicant. The record closed on December 
1, 2016, when I received Applicant’s timely post-hearing submission, which is included in 
the record as Ax. G – W.4 All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received a 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 22, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $88,600 to 
Creditor A for a debt that was charged off as a business loss (SOR 1.a); and that he owes 
$27,141 to Creditor B for a debt that was charged off as a business loss (SOR 1.b). In 
response to the SOR, Applicant denied, with explanations, both allegations. In addition to 
the facts established by the pleadings, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering and 
he has worked for his current employer in an information technology (IT) position since 
March 2011. He held a similar position for a previous employer between June 2000 and 
February 2011. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2005. (Gx. 1) 
 
 In late 2012, Applicant agreed to accept a new job with his current employer at a 
remote site outside the United States. He and his family moved there in March 2013. 
Applicant returned to the United States in May 2015. He and his wife were married from 
April 2011 until divorcing in May 2015. Applicant has two children, ages 10 and 4, for 
whom he pays about $515 in monthly child support. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 31, 48 – 49) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant bought a house for $130,000. He financed the purchase through 
a first mortgage for 80 percent of the cost and a second mortgage for the remaining 20 
percent. The same lender held both notes. As alleged in SOR 1.a (first mortgage) and 1.b 
(second mortgage), Applicant eventually defaulted on both loans. Before Applicant 
actually moved in 2013, he knew his house had lost value because of the national housing 
crisis, and that it was worth only about $80,000 in late 2012. In November 2012, Applicant 
                                                 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s letter forwarding Gx. 1- 4 to Applicant in advance of hearing is included 
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
4 Emails identifying Ax. G – W and waiving the Government’s objections to their admissibility are included 
in the record as Hx. 2. 
3 
 
retained a real estate agent and submitted a hardship letter to the lender seeking approval 
to convey the house through a short sale. Applicant was approved because he qualified 
under the Federal National Mortgage Association’s (Fannie Mae’s) Home Affordable 
Foreclosures Alternative (HAFA) program.5 (Answer; Gx. 1 - 4; Ax. M – W; Tr. 32 – 32) 
 
 Applicant put his house on the market in January 2013. Applicant received a 
contract for a short sale dated April 9, 2013. The price of the house was $80,000. That 
contract fell through because of the delay in processing that resulted from the change of 
lenders on the first mortgage. A second contract for sale, dated April 23, 2013, for the 
same price, also fell through.6 Applicant continued to pay his mortgages until about 
August 2013. In October 2013, Applicant learned that the original lender had sold the first 
mortgage to the lender referenced in SOR 1.a. This meant Applicant had to re-apply for 
permission to seek a short sale of the house. The new lender for the first mortgage then 
demanded, in exchange for resolving the mortgage through a short sale, that Applicant 
also pay the difference between any sale price and the remaining balance on the 
mortgage. This effectively defeated the purpose of short sale as an option. Applicant was 
unable to meet those terms and then tried to negotiate a deed in lieu of foreclosure 
conveyance. That effort also failed and the mortgage went into foreclosure. On April 3, 
2014, the new lender conveyed the property to Fannie Mae for $94,704. Credit reports 
show the remaining balance on the first mortgage was, at most, about $96,985. Applicant 
averred he has not been contacted by the creditor regarding collection of any remaining 
balance on the first mortgage. All available information shows that Applicant no longer 
owes the SOR 1.a debt. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. H; Ax. J – M; Tr. 32 – 35, 45 – 46) 
 
 The original creditor retained the second mortgage alleged in SOR 1.b. That 
creditor forgave the debt in August 2015 and issued an IRS Form 1099-C (Cancellation 
of Debt) reflecting that a debt of $26,684 was forgiven. It is possible that all or part of the 
forgiven debt was attributed to Applicant as income for the 2015 tax year. This record 
does not show that Applicant owes any tax debt because of the forgiven second 
mortgage. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. C; Ax. G; Tr. 27) 
 
 Applicant disclosed the debts alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b when he submitted his 
e-QIP in April 2014. By that time, he had been working with a real estate agent for at least 
16 months to resolve his mortgage debts. Emails and other records he produced show 
he had close and continuing contact with his creditors as he tried to execute, first a short 
sale, then a deed in lieu of foreclosure through a federal mortgage relief program. 
Applicant worked through all of this while working at a remote work site abroad. (Gx. 1; 
Ax. I; Ax. M – W) 
 
 Applicant is meeting all of his current obligations. After his divorce, he was ordered 
to pay child support and has done so as required. After paying this and his other monthly 
expenses, Applicant has about $700 remaining. He currently has no new delinquent or 
past-due debts. His credit history, as reflected in multiple credit reports submitted by both 
                                                 
5 https://www.hmpadmin.com/portal/programs/foreclosure alternatives.jsp. 
 
6 Both offers included letters indicating the purchasers had qualified for the necessary financing. 
4 
 
parties, shows the debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b constitute the only adverse financial 
information in his background. (Gx. 3; Gx. 4; Ax. A; Ax. C – E; Tr. 30 – 31) 
 
 Applicant has an excellent reputation in the workplace. His performance 
evaluations since 2011 reflect superior marks for his work. His supervisor of five years 
holds Applicant in high regard for his reliability, integrity, and professionalism. He feels 
Applicant also is a good father and that he is respected in both the workplace and the 
community. (Ax. B; Ax. F) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to 
the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one 
has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.9 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
                                                 
7 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 
 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the SOR allegations  
under this guideline. The facts thus established reasonably raise a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income 
is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant lost his house to foreclosure in April 2014. 
He also defaulted on a second mortgage for the same house. At the time of the SOR, the 
debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b were still being reported as delinquent.  
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
                                                 
 
10 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control. 
 
 Applicant established that he incurred the SOR 1.a and 1.b debts because his 
house had lost almost 40 percent of its value during the housing market crisis. Applicant 
accepted a transfer to a remote site and had to sell his home. At that time, he knew the 
value of his home was far less than the amount remaining on his mortgages. Applicant 
acted reasonably by retaining a real estate agent and qualified under a federal program 
to help homeowners avoid foreclosure. He made those arrangements in November 2012, 
two months before he put his house up for sale. Two qualified offers to buy the house fell 
through because the lender took too long to accept the terms of sale. Further, the creditor 
to whom the first mortgage was transferred effectively obstructed Applicant’s efforts. 
Otherwise, it is reasonable to conclude, his mortgage may not have gone to foreclosure.  
 
 Applicant’s acceptance of a job transfer was within his control. The loss of his 
home’s value was beyond his control, and the inaction and unresponsiveness of the 
lenders involved was not reasonably foreseeable. Available information shows Applicant 
did not seek to avoid responsibility for his mortgage obligations and that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances starting well over a year before he submitted his e-
QIP. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply. 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are no longer due. Fannie Mae paid almost full value 
for the house during foreclosure. No creditor has taken action against Applicant to collect 
any remaining balance. The first mortgage has a zero balance according to the most 
recent credit reports. The original creditor has forgiven the second mortgage. Applicant’s 
only remaining obligation for the second mortgage may have been to report the amount 
forgiven on his 2015 income taxes. There is no indication in this record that he failed to 
comply with his income tax obligations in this regard. Applicant’s finances are otherwise 
sound. The debts alleged in the SOR constitute the only adverse financial information in 
Applicant’s background, and he is meeting all of his current financial obligations. AG ¶ 
20(c) applies, and on balance, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns presented 
in the SOR. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has held a security clearance since 2005. He has an excellent 
record in the workplace and his supervisor holds him in high regard. He was candid and 
forthright about his debts, which he had been trying to resolve since about November 
2012. Applicant did not incur his debts through misconduct or poor judgment, and he did 
not try to shirk responsibility for them. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record 
evidence as a whole shows that Applicant’s financial problems are not reflective of poor 
judgment or a lack of trustworthiness. The security concerns raised by the Government’s 
information are mitigated. 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
