                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
)     ISCR Case No.15-03498
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated December 5, 2015. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated April 28, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on June 5, 2016.1
Applicant responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017,
The Government submitted seven items for the record.      1
1
2017. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted four of five SOR allegations, and
provided explanations for the allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
He denied SOR allegation 1.d. (Item 3)
Applicant is a 65-year-old who has a trucking company for a defense contractor.
He served on active duty in the military (U.S. Army) from 1971 to 1994, when he retired,
receiving an honorable discharge. He is married and has five children. Applicant has
worked for his current employer since 2010. He completed a security clearance
application in  2014. He has held a security clearance since the beginning of his military
service. (Item 4)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, all of which are 2009, 2014, and 2015
federal tax liens totaling approximately $263,000.00. (Item 1)  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he and his wife encountered slow
employment over the years, which impacted their income. They helped various family
members who had no resources for funerals, lost jobs during the economic crash, and
taking care of grandchildren due to their son’s problems. He noted that his wife spent
20 years in the U.S. Army and they have never had debt problems prior to the tax liens.
(Item 3) They have bills associated with their truck, which is the means of their
livelihood. 
Applicant disclosed in his 2014 security clearance application that he thought his
accountant had electronically filed his tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012. During the
investigative interview, Applicant told the interviewer that they had used the same
accountant for many years. (Item 5) His wife mailed all tax documents to the accountant
each year.  He acknowledged that he may have filed late a time or two, but that he
always asked for an extension of time. Applicant and his wife are on the road working
all the time, and he did not know about the tax liens until he received letters from
various attorneys offering to represent him. Applicant also disclosed in his 2014 security
clearance application that he was paying the IRS $1,700 a month until the debt is paid.
(Item 4)  
The IRS garnished Applicant’s military retirement pay and his pay for driving the
truck. He stated that he had no knowledge of the 2009 tax lien for $108,422. ( Item 5)
In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted two documents, which are
marked as AX A and AX B. AX A shows that Applicant hired a company to resolve all
outstanding debts with the IRS. Applicant submitted an account statement of his military
retirement, dated August 2013, that showed an amount of $1,087 for “tax levies”. He
2
submitted another part of a pay statement, dated tax levy January 22, 2010 with a
monthly amount of $1,087. The pay statement reflected a balance of $54,314.07. (AX
B)
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant’s federal tax lien was issued in 2015 in the
amount of $6,825. He is working with a company and is paying a monthly amount to
pay the IRS debt.
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant’s federal tax lien was issued in 2014 in the
amount of $32,102.00. He is working with a company and is paying a monthly amount
to pay the IRS debt.
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant’s federal tax lien was issued in 2014 in the
amount of $8,364. He is working with a company and is paying a monthly amount to
pay the IRS amount.
As to SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant’s federal tax lien was issued in November
2009 in the amount of $108,000. He denied this allegation as it appears to be the same
as SOR allegation 1.e.
As to SOR allegation 1.e, it appears that it is the same lien as listed in 1.d. It has
the same account number and the same date and same amount of $108,000.
Applicant’s credit report, dated 2014, provided information on four November
2009 federal tax liens all in the amount of $108,000 for two different counties. (Item 6)
The remainder of the credit report reflected other accounts as “pays as agreed.”
The 2015 credit bureau report showed the five federal tax liens that are alleged
on the SOR with the same amounts reflected on the SOR. All other accounts are either
paid and closed or show zero balance. (Item 7)
Applicant’s net monthly income is $15,000 and his bills are approximately
$12,000 to $13,000 a month.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
The Government produced credible evidence to establish that Applicant had
federal tax liens. Applicant admits all allegation except one, which appears to be a
duplicate. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶
19(a), 19(c), and 19(g)
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has been employed as a truck driver with his company. A reduction in
business contracts occurred during the slow economic times of 2008 and his income
was affected. He also helped family members. He paid his bills timely as reflected on his
credit reports. The federal tax liens occurred when he thought the tax information sent to
is accountant was filed electronically. He did not know of the federal tax liens until later.
His military pay was garnished by the IRS, and he has been paying a monthly amount to
them since at least 2013 to pay the tax debts. He is also working with a company to
resolve all tax issues. He has no new delinquent debt. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors. I
have noted Applicant’s  service in the military. He has had a clearance since the
beginning of his military career. He and his wife raised five children. He had no financial
6
problems before the federal tax liens. The tax information was sent to the accountant
and Applicant believed there was no issue.
 
Applicant is 65 years old. He served in the U.S. Army and retired with an
honorable discharge. He has worked as a contractor for many years. He is repaying the
federal tax liens and has been since at least 2013. He provided sufficient information to
carry his burden of proof. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
