 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-00532 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Ryan Nerney, Esquire 
Edmund Law Firm  
 
April 10, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 28, 2012. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 16, 2015, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 31, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on April 21, 2016. The case was assigned to me on April 25, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 4, 
2016, setting the case for June 29, 2016. That hearing was canceled and a new Notice 
of Hearing was issued on June 15, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 6, 
2016. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits 
A through G. Department Counsel had no objection and the exhibits were admitted into 
the record. Applicant requested the record remain open until July 22, 2016, for receipt of 
additional exhibits. No additional exhibits were received. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on July 14, 2016. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and currently holds a 
security clearance in connection with this employment. He is married.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has failed to fulfill his financial obligations, which may indicate poor self-
control, a lack of judgment, and an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  
Applicant admitted allegations 1.a and 1.b in the SOR under this Paragraph. He denied 
1.c and 1.d. (Answer.) Applicant submitted additional evidence to support his request for 
access to classified information. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file his Federal and state tax returns for tax 
years 2009 and 2010 until approximately June 29, 2016. (SOR 1.a and 1.b.)1 This was 
the original date set for his hearing, and one week before the date when the hearing was 
actually held. He admitted that the reason he failed to file these returns for many years 
was “procrastination.” He further stated regarding his failure to file his tax returns, “There 
is no good excuse. The only excuse I can give you is what I’ve already stated. I’m just a 
chronic procrastinator. I have been for most of my life.” (Tr. 18, 20, 26-27, 34, 38, 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant properly noted on Government Exhibit 1 at Section 26 that he had not 
filed these tax returns and further stated that he had an appointment with a tax preparer 
“to file and pay by 4/15/12.” He subsequently had an interview in September 2012 with 
an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management. In that interview Applicant 
admitted that he had not begun the process of filing his tax returns for 2009 and 2010. He 
                                                 
1 The SOR does not contain allegations concerning a failure by Applicant to file state tax returns for 2009 
and 2010. His failure to do so can be considered in terms of discussing any possible mitigation and under 
the whole-person concept. 
 
 
3 
 
 
further stated that he intended to file the subject returns by the end of 2012. (Tr. 28-30, 
35; Government Exhibit 2.)  
 
 Applicant Exhibits F and G are unsigned copies of Applicant’s 2009 and 2010 
Federal tax returns. Applicant testified that they had been mailed to the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) approximately June 30, 2016. Applicant stated that he has timely filed all of 
his tax returns after 2010. The record was left open for Applicant to provide return receipts 
from the IRS for his 2009 and 2010 tax returns, as well as additional tax returns and other 
documentation from the IRS. No post-hearing documents were received from Applicant. 
(Tr. 18-19, 21-24, 31-33.) 
 
  Applicant denied SOR 1.c and 1.d, which alleged he failed to file his Federal tax 
returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. (Tr. 17-18.) Applicant Exhibits A and B are copies 
of the subject tax returns, each of which is signed by Applicant and his wife within the tax 
return filing deadlines. Government Exhibits contain no information supporting the 
allegations that Applicant has failed to file these particular returns. Based on the available 
evidence, I find they were filed as required, and these two allegations are found for 
Applicant. 
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
 
 
4 
 
 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, one applies to the facts found in this case: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required 
or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant, based on documentary and testimonial evidence, failed to file his 2009 
and 2010 Federal income tax returns in a timely fashion. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise this potentially disqualifying condition. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions may 
be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ In addition, AG ¶ 20(b) 
states that disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Neither 
one of these is applicable in this case. As stated, Applicant knew for almost four years 
that the Government was concerned about his failure to file the subject tax returns. His 
failure to do so was deliberate and willing. Applicant’s sole excuse, which he realizes was 
not sufficient, was that he is a chronic procrastinator. Filing the subject tax returns a week 
before the hearing, assuming that it was actually done, is insufficient to show that the 
Applicant has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” or that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control.” (AG ¶ ¶ 20(d) and (c).)  
 
Applicant has not acted in a way that shows good judgment, since the evidence 
shows that his habit of procrastination remains. It is particularly telling that he failed to file 
the subject tax returns until one week before the hearing, and failed to provide 
documentation that those returns were actually filed as claimed. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply to the facts of this case. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to mitigate 
his failure to file Federal and state income tax returns for many years after they were due. 
Under the circumstances I cannot find that there is little or no “potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). In addition, Applicant’s 
conduct does not show permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6), and there is 
considerable likelihood of continuation or recurrence under AG ¶ 2(a)(9). Using the whole-
person standard, Applicant has not mitigated the security significance of his financial 
considerations, and is not eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
