 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02498 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 17, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was 
received on April 8, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Therefore, the Government’s evidence 
identified as Items 2 through 9 were admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on February 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. He denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1975. He has been 
married since 1978. He has one adult child. He has been employed regularly since 
1998 and with his present employer, a government contractor, since 2008. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c ($33,840) alleged a delinquent federal tax lien entered in 2012. 
Applicant disclosed during a March 2013 background interview with a government 
investigator that he has had difficulties paying his federal taxes since about 2002, 
because he did not have enough money withheld during the tax year, and then did not 
have sufficient money to pay taxes. He told the investigator that each year he 
established a repayment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), but that plan 
would be invalidated the following year because he did not pay the total amount he 
owed for the current tax year. Applicant told the investigator that this pattern was 
ongoing.1  
 
 Applicant was late filing his 2011 federal income tax return, so he filed an 
extension, and then forgot to file the return until the IRS notified him in 2013. He told the 
investigator that after the IRS notified him of his failure to file his return, he filed the 
2011 federal tax return in January 2013. He intended to set up a payment plan with the 
IRS. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR regarding the tax lien, he stated, “I admit, I’m 
paying them in monthly installments of $600 each month.”2 A letter from December 
2012, showed that Applicant’s employer was notified of the IRS tax lien and 
subsequently indicated that it “will deduct and send to the [IRS] sufficient amounts until 
total liability is paid.”3 It is presumed that this levy was implemented, but Applicant did 
not provide supporting documents to substantiate the payments or the current balance 
on this debt.  
 
Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,045) and stated in his answer to the 
SOR that he would contact the creditor. This debt became delinquent after Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 I have not considered for disqualifying purposes any negative information about Applicant’s failure to 
timely file or pay federal income taxes for tax years that were not alleged. I will consider information as it 
relates to Applicant’s credibility, in analyzing mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
2 GE 2, 4. 
 
3 GE 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. 
 
3 
 
 
2013 background interview. He did not provide supporting documents to show he has 
contacted the creditor or resolved the debt.4  
 
The account for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,492) was opened and became 
delinquent after Applicant’s 2013 background interview. In Applicant’s answer to the 
SOR he stated he never heard of the creditor. The account was transferred to a 
collection company.5 Applicant has not provided supporting documents to show he has 
attempted to contact the creditor or resolve this debt.  
 
 Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he was making monthly 
payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($10,821), for a repossessed vehicle. He 
admitted the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($491), but stated he “believed this account 
was paid off.”6 He referenced that he thought this debt was related to the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.d, and it was paid. He did not provide supporting documents to substantiate any 
payments made regarding the debts.7 The debt is not resolved.  
 
Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,399), stating he did not remember the 
account. During Applicant’s 2013 background interview, he was confronted with 
information about this debt, and acknowledged the account was a gas credit card. He 
was aware he was late on some payments, but believed he paid the account. He 
indicated he would contact the creditor, validate the account, and pay it, if it was 
legitimate. Applicant did not provide documentation on any action he took to contact the 
creditor or resolve the debt. It is unresolved.8  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from February 
2013, March 2015, and October 2015.9 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to helping his daughter with her 
expenses in 2011. He indicated that in 2013 he was going to change the amount that 
was withheld from his income for his federal income taxes, so that he would not have 
future problems. He told the government investigator that he used various computer 
financial programs to help him organize his finances and alert him when bills were due 
to be paid. At that time, he explained that he did not anticipate any future financial 
problems.10 
                                                          
4 GE 2, 6, 7.  
 
5 GE 2, 6, 7. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 GE 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. 
 
8 GE 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. 
 
9 GE 5, 6, 7. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of unresolved delinquent debts, including a tax lien, which 
he has been unwilling to satisfy. There is sufficient evidence to support the application 
of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that he is paying or resolving his delinquent 
debts. There is some evidence that his employer is garnishing his wages to pay the tax 
lien, but no additional evidence was provided. Applicant indicated he has paid or 
resolved some debts, but did not provide supporting documents. He also indicated he 
was going to contact a creditor to resolve a debt, but did not substantiate actions he 
may have taken. He denied owing a debt that he had previously acknowledged during a 
background interview. Two debts became delinquent after his background interview. I 
cannot find his behavior is unlikely to recur. His conduct is recent, ongoing, and casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to helping his daughter with her 
expenses in 2011. He admitted that for many years he did not have sufficient money  
withheld from his salary for taxes, and was also unable to pay them when due. For the 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must show that the behavior that caused his 
financial problems were beyond his control. Helping his daughter was somewhat 
beyond his control, in that as a father he is expected to help her when necessary. 
However, his repeated failure to have an adequate amount of money withheld from his 
income, and then repeatedly having tax issues, was within his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. It has been six years since he helped his daughter and experienced 
financial problems. He did not provide evidence whether he continues to help his 
daughter or the circumstances surrounding the situation. He did not provide evidence 
regarding the current status of his tax lien or the resolution of his debts. Based on the 
limited evidence, presumably his tax debt is being paid through garnishment of his 
wages. This does not constitute acting responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal 
application. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling. Two of the 
debts alleged became delinquent after Applicant’s 2013 background interview and he 
was on notice that his finances were a security concern. His employer is levying his 
 
7 
 
 
wages to pay the tax debt. He did not provide documents to support his assertions that 
he is paying or has resolved delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
his financial problems are under control or being resolved. His employer’s levy on his 
income does not constitute a good-faith effort to pay his tax lien. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
do not apply. Applicant denied owing some debts or being aware of them, but failed to 
provide evidence of actions he may have taken to substantiate the basis of claim. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 66 years old. He admitted to having tax problems because he failed 
to have a sufficient amount of money withheld from his income and then was unable to 
pay his taxes when they became due. He indicated he paid certain debts and was 
unaware of others. He admitted he owed another debt and was going to contact the 
creditor. Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence to substantiate any of his 
claims. His failure to comply with rules and regulations concerning his legal obligation to 
timely pay his taxes is a security concern. He has failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
