 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04588 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 18, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 19, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 25, 2016. Applicant’s response from June 2016 is marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE 1 are admitted in evidence without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He obtained two 
associate’s degrees in 1991 and 1994, a bachelor’s degree in 1993, and a master’s 
degree in 1997. He has worked for his current employer since June 2014. He served in 
the U.S. military on active duty from 1978 until 1989, and in the Reserve or Air National 
Guard from 1992 to 2007. He was honorably discharged after each period of service. 
He worked briefly as a federal civilian from September 1989 to January 1990. He was 
granted DOD security clearances in 1979 and 1997. He married in 1989, and divorced 
in 2005. He has four adult children.1  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce in 2005, his consequent 
court-ordered obligations of $1,450 monthly in alimony until 2019 and $633 monthly in 
child support that only recently ended in January 2016 when his youngest child turned 
18 years old, a job layoff in 2009, a brief period of unemployment that followed, a 
subsequent in-state job relocation in which he took a $43,000 pay cut, the downturn in 
the real-estate market in the same year, an out-of-state job relocation in 2010, and a 
second job layoff in 2012. His primary residence was foreclosed during this period after 
his mortgage company declined to lower his payments. His two rental properties were 
also foreclosed after he was unable to find tenants and the mortgage companies would 
not work with him since the properties were rentals. Applicant provided documentation 
to show that the largest of his financial debts alleged in the SOR, pertaining to one of 
his rental properties, was canceled, and he paid a minor medical debt. He is in the 
process of resolving his remaining debts.2 
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $157,906, comprised of a 
mortgage account in foreclosure status with a balance of $138,494, a home equity line 
of credit charged off for $14,151, a consumer line of credit charged off for $4,684, and 
two minor debts for a medical account and an apartment cleaning fee. Applicant 
admitted to all of the SOR debts. The debts are established by Applicant’s admissions 
and credit reports.3 
 
The most recent credit report is from November 2015. It reports SOR debts ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. The credit report from August 2014 reports SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e. 
Applicant provided a screenshot of a credit card statement to show that he paid SOR 
debt ¶ 1.a in April 2016. He provided an IRS Form 1099-C to show that the creditor 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3.  
 
2 Items 1-5; AE 1.  
 
3 Items 1-5; AE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
canceled SOR debt ¶ 1.d in September 2015. He stated that after multiple attempts 
since April 2016 to locate SOR debt ¶ 1.c, he began payments of $250 monthly in June 
2016 towards it. He initially disputed SOR debt ¶ 1.b. He tried unsuccessfully to locate 
the creditor after he received the SOR, and intends to continue to try to do so. He stated 
that he thought his line of credit in SOR debt ¶ 1.e was closed. He submitted 
documentation to show that in April 2016 he inquired into the debt. He indicated that the 
creditor’s response was that they do not have a record of it. He provided a copy of his 
online banking statement to show that he carries a zero balance for a line of credit with 
the same last four account numbers as that listed on the August 2014 credit report for 
SOR debt ¶ 1.e. He intends to continue to investigate this debt.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Items 1-5; AE 1. 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial problems. 
His largest debt was canceled and he paid the minor medical debt. He is paying his 
second largest debt. He is resolving his remaining debts. There is no evidence that he 
has incurred additional delinquent debts. I am satisfied that Applicant’s current finances 
are in order. AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(e) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I also considered the cause 
of Applicant’s financial problems and that he has taken action to resolve his debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia  
Administrative Judge 
