 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06854 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Guideline E trustworthiness concerns established 
by her husband’s ongoing status as an undocumented, unregistered immigrant residing 
in the United States without legal permission. She has not shown that it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security that she be granted eligibility for access 
to sensitive information. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF took this action under DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017 for all adjudicative decisions on or after that 
 
2 
date, including this one.1 It supersedes and replaces the AGs that Applicant received 
with the SOR. Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not 
affect my decision in this case.  
 
On April 29, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing. On July 6, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including Items 1 through 
3. Applicant received the FORM on July 19, 2016. She was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and did not object to the 
Government’s documents. The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 2 and 3 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned 
to me on April 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR and provided a written 
statement along with several documents.2 I have incorporated her admission and other 
comments into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. She was born in the United States in 1981. She is 
married and is the mother of three children. She earned an associate’s degree in 2007. 
Since April 2010, she has worked for a government contractor in the health care 
industry. She submitted an application for a position of public trust in December 2014.3   
  
 Applicant’s husband is 42 years old. He was born in a Latin American country in 
1975. He came to the United States in 1994. They met in 1998 and married in 2003.4 
Applicant disclosed the following information about her husband on her application:  
 
He is undocumented. He has a foreign [name of country] passport and 
identification card. He entered the U.S. in 1994. Hasn’t legalized his status 
due to fear of being deported. Can’t afford a lawyer at the moment to get 
legalized.5    
 
 Applicant’s husband remains an undocumented and unregistered immigrant alien, 
residing in the United States illegally. (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant states that they have 
sought legal advice from immigration lawyers on several occasions, but have not 
received useful information about legalizing his status. He maintains a valid passport and 
                                                          
1 The new Adjudicative Guidelines are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 The documents Applicant provided with her answer are considered part of the record. 
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Items 1, 2, 3.  
 
5 Item 2 at 20.  
 
3 
identification card from his native country. He also has an Individual Taxpayer 
Identification Number from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, issued in 2007. Copies of 
these documents are included with the answer. She states that in about 1996, after her 
husband first came to the United States, his uncle “requested asylum for him” but they 
later lost contact. She has no paperwork to support this assertion.6  
 
 Applicant indicated in her June 2015 background interview that her husband was 
at that time unemployed, and she was not able to provide any information about any 
previous job he might have held.7 She provided no updated information about her 
husband’s employment status in her answer. She described herself as the “main 
provider” for their household.8  
 
 Applicant’s husband is neither a U.S. resident alien (with a “green card”), nor is he 
a naturalized U.S. citizen. He resides with Applicant in their home in the United States. 
He has no legal documents that verify or permit his legal residency in the United States. 
Applicant indicates that she is working on getting her husband’s status legalized but 
confesses that she does not know what steps to take, and cannot afford a lawyer to 
assist with the process.9  
 
 Applicant attests that she is trustworthy, honest, humble, and loyal. She says she 
meets and complies with all rules and regulations, and would never bring harm to her 
company or her reputation. She indicates that she understands the importance of 
confidentiality and integrity.10  
  
Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective June 8, 2017. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.”  
                                                          
6 Item 2.  
 
7 Item 3 at 3. 
 
8 Item 2.  
 
9 Item 2.  
 
10 Item 2. She provided a list of people, probably co-workers, who could attest to her character.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 16. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. . .  
 
 
5 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; . . . and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
The text of SOR ¶ 1.a, which Applicant admits, is as follows:  
 
Your spouse is an undocumented and unregistered immigrant alien, 
residing in the United States illegally.11  
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel cites Guideline E disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 
16(d), 16(e) and 16(g),12 but does not specifically argue why they might apply to the facts 
of this particular case. He merely argues that:  
 
Applicant’s answer does not meet the burden, offering little to mitigate the 
concerns raised about questionable judgment and/or untrustworthiness 
raised by associating with someone involved in criminal activity.13 
 
The “criminal activity” suggested by the Government is the unregistered 
immigration status of Applicant’s husband, with whom she “associates” by virtue of their 
marriage. Yet the Government cites no federal or other criminal statute to support 
application of AG ¶ 16(g). “Unlawful entry” into the United States is a criminal offense, 
under 18 U.S.C. 1325(a). However, the possible application of that criminal statute to her 
husband is far too speculative for me to consider it here. He came to the United States 
over 20 years ago, and how exactly he did so is not part of the record. An individual’s 
“unlawful presence” in the United States may well violate U.S. immigration law and 
subject the person to potential deportation. However, standing alone, illegal presence in 
the United States is not necessarily a criminal offense. Regardless, there is no indication 
that Applicant’s husband has ever been charged with a crime due to his immigration 
status, or that he has been (or is) “involved in criminal activity.” I therefore cannot find 
that AG ¶ 16(g) applies.14   
 
                                                          
11 Item 1 (SOR).  
 
12 The FORM cites the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E of the adjudicative guidelines made 
effective on September 1, 2006. The corresponding disqualifying conditions under the new AGs, effective 
as of June 8, 2017, are substantially similar, and AG ¶ 16(g) is unchanged.  
 
13 FORM at 3 (citing ISCR Case No. 07-07645 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2009)).  
 
14 I note that in ISCR Case No. 07-07645 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2009) the Appeal Board affirmed a 
decision against an applicant who was married to an illegal alien under AG ¶ 16(g), finding that being in 
the U.S. illegally was sufficient “criminal activity,” even though no supporting statute was cited. I 
nonetheless find that the Government has not met its burden of establishing the applicability of AG ¶ 16(g) 
here, for the reasons stated.  
 
 
6 
In ISCR Case No. 15-00693, the Appeal Board noted that “sharing living quarters 
with someone who is in violation of U.S. immigration laws poses the requisite heightened 
risk” of exploitation. “That is, it is foreseeable that this relationship is one that could be 
exploited by those interested in acquiring U.S. [protected] information, should it come to 
their attention.”15 That case concerned both Guideline E (AG ¶ 16(e)) as well as 
Guideline B (foreign influence). Guideline B is not alleged here but the same logic 
applies under AG ¶ 16(e). Indeed, Applicant acknowledged this possibility when she 
disclosed on her application that her husband had not legalized his status “due to fear of 
being deported.”16 AG ¶ 16(e) therefore applies. 
  
It is not clear from the record exactly how long Applicant has known of her 
husband’s status as an unregistered immigrant. However, she says they met in 1998, 
and they have been married since 2003. They have three children together and live 
together as a family in the same house, in the United States. The record therefore 
supports a conclusion that Applicant has known since at least 2003 when they married, 
and probably long before, that he is unregistered and resides in the United States 
without legal permission to do so. This evidence shows Applicant’s “questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability . . . [and] unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations . . .” The “catch-all” disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) 
therefore apply. 
 
The Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proved conduct under any 
of the Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance (or, as here, for a position 
of public trust). See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). The 
required nexus is shown because several Guideline E disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct trustworthiness concerns are set 
forth under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 Applicant’s husband’s immigration status remains ongoing and unresolved. 
Applicant says she has sought legal advice about legalizing her husband’s status in the 
past. There is no indication, however, that she has taken concrete steps to resolve the 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 15-00693 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016). In that case, the Appeal Board affirmed the 
denial of a clearance to an applicant who lived with his girlfriend, an illegal alien and Mexican citizen. The 
administrative judge’s analysis focused on the Applicant’s vulnerability to exploitation under both Guideline 
E AG ¶ 16(e) and Guideline B, due to similar concerns of heightened risk. In a concurring opinion, 
Administrative Judge Duffy held that he would have applied AG ¶ 16(g) instead. See id. at 2-3.  
 
16 Item 2 at 20.  
 
 
7 
situation. Her husband has had a taxpayer identification number since 2007, yet has 
taken no other steps towards legalization. He also remains unemployed. Her husband’s 
ongoing immigration status therefore continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
I credit Applicant with candidly disclosing her husband’s immigration status to the 
Government on her application. This limits the risk of her being manipulated due to that 
relationship, as has been suggested by a concurring opinion of a member of the Appeal 
Board.17 Applicant has taken some steps to reduce or eliminate her vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. However, the situation is ongoing, and an end is 
not in sight. AG ¶ 17(e) does not fully apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
arising under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
                                                          
17 Concurring opinion of A.J. Duffy in ISCR Case No. 15-00693 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016). 
 
8 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with the national 
security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive 
information. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
