 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-05851 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct considerations and alcohol consumption 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 8, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on April 12, 2016. The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 4 
included in the FORM are admitted into evidence, absent objection. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 22, 2016. On May 5, 2016, 
Applicant responded with a two-page email and six pages of documentation. These are 
collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AE A) and admitted into evidence.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2014. He graduated from high school in 1997 
and took some courses at a community college. He reports no military service and he 
has been married since July 2014.2   
 
Applicant disclosed a 1993 citation for being a minor in possession of alcohol in 
his Questionnaire for National Security Positions/ Security Clearance Application (SCA) 
that he signed in October 2014. Applicant was attending a friend’s house party where 
alcohol was served when the police showed up. Along with several others, he was cited 
for being a minor in possession of alcohol and given a ticket. He did not have to go to 
court, but paid a fine of approximately $100.3 It is not clear whether Applicant 
possessed or ingested alcohol at that time, or was merely found in the presence of 
alcohol.4 In any event, he was 14 years old. This incident won’t be considered except to 
say it is mitigated.  
 
In August 2000, Applicant was charged with felony assault, after drinking a few 
beers.5 He shared about five beers with a friend who then provoked a fight with some 
young men passing by. Applicant got involved in a wrestling skirmish with one of the 
young men, and he was subsequently arrested. He was not cited for alcohol or public 
intoxication, or given a breath or blood test.6 Instead, he was charged with felony 
assault because the police initially perceived the fight to be a hate crime. Applicant 
spent 13 days in jail before he was arraigned. Applicant’s attorney had the charge 
reduced to assault 4, a misdemeanor, and the court granted Applicant a deferred 
prosecution.7 This meant that if Applicant met the court imposed conditions including 
probation for one year, time served, and paid the fines, the charge would be dismissed 
after one year. The charge was dismissed. There is no evidence of any causal 
                                                          
1 Six pages of documents attached including: a one page Final Report of Deferred Prosecution reflecting 
treatment completed on November 12, 2015; a one page letter from district court stating that Applicant 
successfully completed his two year treatment program in late 2015, and his probation in January 2016; 
and several pages of illegible slips purporting to show Applicant’s weekly attendance at AA meetings.  
 
2 Item 1.  
 
3 Item 3, at page 11. 
 
4 Item 3, at page 11.  
 
5 Item 3, at page 15.  
 
6 Item 3, at page 15. 
 
7 Item 3, at page 16. 
 
3 
 
connection between Applicant’s ingestion of a few beers and the ensuing wrestling 
match. Applicant mitigated this incident which occurred 17 years ago when he was 21.  
 
In December 2006, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). 
He consumed about eight drinks in the four-hour period before his arrest.8 He was 
ordered by the court to have an alcohol assessment. Subsequently, he was ordered to 
attend an eight-hour alcohol education class. He was sentenced in April 2007 to a fine 
of $1,000, court costs, license suspended three months, followed by mandatory use of 
an ignition interlock device.9 Applicant complied with all of the court-ordered conditions 
and the charge was reduced to negligent driving.10 This was an alcohol-related event 
but not necessarily criminal behavior. It should have been a wake-up call to Applicant. 
 
Applicant was arrested again for DUI in May 2013. He claims that he had five or 
six alcohol drinks in the two hours before he sat down behind the wheel.11 Applicant had 
another alcohol assessment and was recommended to attend outpatient treatment. The 
court again granted a deferred prosecution on the following conditions: 40 days jail time 
suspended; supervised probation for two years; license suspended for two years, 
ignition interlock device, fines, court costs, and whatever treatment was recommended 
by his alcohol assessment.12 Applicant complied with all of the conditions, and has not 
consumed any alcohol since this incident.13 He attended AA meetings and completed 
two years of out-patient treatment, as evidenced by the documents attached to his 
Response to the FORM.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
8 Item 3, at page 10. 
 
9 Item 3, at page 10. 
 
10 Item 3, at page 11. 
 
11 Item 3, at page 9. 
 
12 Item 3 at page 10.    
 
13 Item 3, page 10.  
 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
 
5 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
 Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents, the DUI arrest in December 2006, 
and the DUI arrest in May 2013. Applicant disclosed these transgressions in his SCA 
and he has admitted them in his Answer to the SOR. AG ¶ ¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was in May 2013. He has completed 
treatment, attends AA meetings, and committed himself to a life of sobriety.14 An 
inference can be drawn that Applicant has confronted his condition, and he is coping 
with his affliction. Applicant has met his burden in establishing that sufficient time has 
elapsed since his last alcohol-related event, and he has taken responsible measures to 
insure that it never happens again. The above-mentioned mitigating conditions apply to 
dispel security concerns about Applicant’s future alcohol use.   
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
   
   The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30.  
 
                                                          
14 AE A.  
 
6 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶  
31. The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and,  
 
 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the  
           person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
 Applicant has admitted to two arrests for DUI within the last 11 years, and the 
street brawl when he was 21 years old. Although Applicant hired an attorney in each 
case, and obtained deferred prosecutions and ultimate dismissal of charges, the above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and, 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
            Applicant has not been involved in any criminal activities since his 2013 arrest. 
His interaction with the criminal justice system has virtually always involved alcohol. He 
has now confronted his alcohol problem, and completed treatment including attendance 
at AA meetings. His employment with a defense contractor is a sign of rehabilitation. He 
is credited with divulging his actions on the SF 86 and during his background interview. 
The district court and probation department documents attached to his Response to the 
FORM, corroborate his commitment to sobriety. This and the passage of time since that 
last arrest leave me with no doubt that Applicant is ready to be entrusted with access to 
classified information. I find that Applicant’s alcohol involvement and criminal conduct 
security concerns have been mitigated and that AG ¶¶32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G and J in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   For Applicant 
 
           Subparagraphs 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
