KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant contends the amount of the delinquent debt was too small to create security
concerns when he has consistently met other financial obligations. We note the amount of the
Federal tax lien was over $14,000.  Nothing in Guideline F indicates there must be any particular
threshold amount of delinquent or unresolved debts to raise security concerns.
CASENO: 15-08676.a1
DATE: 04/28/2017
DATE: April 28, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-08676
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Richard L. Morris, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
2, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 17, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 47 years old, served on active duty for about seven years and received a
general discharge under honorable conditions due to a pattern of misconduct.  During discharge
processing, he acknowledged he was ineligible to reenlist.  He had attained the grade of E-5, but left
military service as an E-2.  His misconduct included alcohol-related driving offenses. 
When Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2015, he stated that he
received an honorable discharge.   He denied intentionally falsifying his SCA.  He testified that he
was distracted by another worker when answering the question about the characterization of his
military discharge.  He does not recall seeing “general under honorable conditions” in the drop-
down menu for the types of discharges and thought a general discharge was the same as an
honorable.
The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts, including child-support arrearage, a Federal tax lien,
and three state tax liens.  Applicant testified that he works at sea for periods of four or five months
at a time.  While at sea, his pay is deposited in a joint bank account, and he counts on his wife to pay
the bills. The SOR was an “eye opener” because he was unaware of the derogatory information in
his credit reports.   He earned about $105,000 in 2015.   
Applicant is making regular payments on the child support arrearage.  For five debts,
including two state tax liens and a Federal tax lien, Applicant provided no documentary evidence
of either payments or payment agreements.  Two of the alleged state tax liens are duplicate debts. 
Applicant denied other debts that have been remove from his credit report.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstance making
them unlikely to recur.  He encountered several conditions beyond his control, including his wife
opening accounts without his knowledge.  He acted responsibly in handling the child support
arrearage, but not regarding other debts.  He made no effort to monitor his finances or determine his
financial situation until he received the SOR.  He appears to have made payment agreements for two
debts, but submitted no evidence of any payments.  He took no meaningful action to resolve the tax
lien until after the hearing.  He continues to trust his wife to manage the family finances without any
meaningful involvement.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the child support arrearage, one
duplicate debt, and the denied debts removed from his credit report.  While Applicant has taken
some steps to resolve the other debts, he had done too little too late.  
When Applicant submitted his SCA, he was a responsible adult and knew his military service
was terminated because of his misconduct.  The Judge found Applicant’s explanation that his
discharge was the equivalent of an honorable discharge implausible and unpersuasive.  His
falsification was not minor and did not happen under unique circumstances. 
Discussion
Applicant asserts the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant made no effort to correct his
falsification was contrary to the record evidence.  Appeal Brief at 11.  However, he does not identify
the record evidence that contradicts the Judge’s conclusion.  This assertion of error fails for lack of
specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 14-05920 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  
Applicant also essentially contends the amount of the delinquent debt was too small to create
security concerns when he has consistently met other financial obligations.  In this regard, we note
the amount of the Federal tax lien was over $14,000.  Nothing in Guideline F indicates there must
be any particular threshold amount of delinquent or otherwise unresolved debts that must be reached
before an applicant’s financial difficulties raise security concerns.  The Judge must consider the
record as a whole in reaching a common sense conclusion about whether the evidence raises such
concerns.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-10168 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 1, 2003).  Based on our review
of the record, we find no error in the Judge’s conclusion that some of Applicant’s debts raised
security concerns under Guideline F.
 
Applicant further contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence.  For example,
he argues that he provided a reasonable explanation for not knowing of the delinquent debts until
he received the SOR and that he mistakenly believed his military discharge was honorable.  The
Judge made findings about many of the matters that Applicant has cited and addressed them in his
analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov, 22, 2016).    
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as
a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  A parties disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or the ability to argue for
a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No 15-00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016.)
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
