 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05475 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government withdrew the foreign preference security concern and Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference, and Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 26, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 23, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
received the FORM on June 2, 2016. Applicant’s response, dated June 4, 2016, is 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 8 and AE 1 are admitted 
in evidence without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Pakistan. The request was included in the record as Item 9. Applicant did not 
object. The request is not admitted in evidence but I have taken administrative notice of 
the facts contained in Item 9. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer overseas in support of the U.S. military, at times in 
volatile situations, since December 2013. He obtained a high-school diploma in 1990 
from a school in Pakistan, and attended community college in the United States in 1997 
but did not earn a degree. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from November 
1996 to May 1997, and in the Reserve from May 1997 to May 2003. From October 2001 
through October 2010, Applicant also worked as a driver to financially support his 
family. His duties as a driver conflicted with his military duties, resulting in Applicant 
receiving a discharge under other than honorable conditions. Applicant previously 
worked for a U.S. defense contractor, also overseas in support of the U.S. military, from 
November 2010 to July 2013. He has held a DOD security clearance since February 
2011. He is married with two adult children and two adult stepchildren.1 
  
Applicant was born in Pakistan to Pakistani parents. He immigrated to the United 
States on a student visa in 1991. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen and obtained a 
U.S. passport in October 2010. Applicant’s wife and children are U.S. citizens by birth 
and reside in the United States. Applicant’s sister, a dual citizen of Pakistan and the 
United States, resides in the United States with her family.2  
 
Applicant’s mother, father, brother, sister-in-law, and nephew are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. Applicant has not had any contact with his father since the 
                                                          
1 Items 1-8; AE 1. Applicant indicated that he underwent three counterintelligence screenings in 2010, 
2014, and 2016, and was not deemed a security risk. AE 1. 
 
2 Items 1-8; AE 1. 
 
 
3 
1990’s, after his father left his mother. Applicant’s mother is elderly. Applicant 
communicates with her weekly. He provided her $2,000 between 2001 through 2012 to 
assist with her living expenses. Applicant communicates quarterly with his brother and 
sister-in-law, and twice yearly with his nephew. Applicant has not visited his family in 
Pakistan since September 2013.3 
 
Applicant’s father retired from the Pakistan military as a lieutenant colonel in 
1992. His brother has served in the Pakistan military since 1988 and is currently a 
colonel, and his nephew since 2012 and is currently a lieutenant. His mother and sister-
in-law are homemakers.  
 
 Applicant indicated that his allegiance lies with the United States. His wife works 
in the United States, and his children attend college in the United States. Applicant has 
owned his home since October 2001. Applicant received two certificates of appreciation 
from the U.S. military in 2012 and 2015. A 2013 letter of recommendation from an 
officer in the U.S. military, who was the linguist manager for whom Applicant worked, 
described Applicant as a linguist of the highest caliber who has built a reputation such 
that their teams have requested Applicant by name on several occasions. Applicant 
stated that he would report any incidents involving threats or blackmail to the police and 
his supervisor.4   
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan remains a safe haven for terrorist groups seeking to conduct domestic, 
regional, and global attacks. Several terrorist networks active in Afghanistan operate 
largely out of Pakistan. The potential for the trafficking and proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction are also a concern.  
 
Pakistan continues to experience significant terrorist violence. The Pakistani 
military undertook operations against some groups that conducted attacks within 
Pakistan, but failed to do so against other groups that continue to operate, train, rally, 
propagandize, and fundraise in Pakistan. While Pakistani military operations disrupted 
the actions of some terrorist groups in Pakistan, it did not directly target them.   
 
In May 2011, U.S. special forces personnel raided a large al-Qaida compound in 
Pakistan and shot and killed al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden. In announcing bin 
Laden’s death, senior administration officials characterized him as a “sworn enemy of 
the United States and a danger to all humanity.” That he was found in a residential 
neighborhood of Pakistan, in a compound that was “roughly eight times larger than 
other homes in the area with 12-to-18 foot walls topped with barbed wire” and other 
“extremely elaborate” physical and operational security measures, highlights the U.S. 
concern that terrorists, militants, and insurgents find safe havens in areas of Pakistan.  
                                                          
3 Items 1-8; AE 1. 
 
4 Items 1-8; AE 1. 
 
 
4 
Human rights problems include extrajudicial and targeted killings, 
disappearances, torture, lack of rule of law, and sectarian violence. Corruption within 
the government and police, as well as rape, domestic violence, sexual harassment, 
honor crimes, other harmful traditional practices, and discrimination against women and 
girls remain serious problems. Lack of government accountability remains a problem, 
and abuses often go unpunished, fostering a culture of impunity. Authorities seldom 
punish government officials for human rights violations. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns   
under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
6 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. Applicant’s family 
members are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His brother and nephew serve in the 
Pakistani military. Terrorist organizations, the potential for the trafficking and 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and human rights problems are present in 
Pakistan. In addition, the Pakistani military has undertaken operations and disrupted 
the actions of some terrorist groups in Pakistan, but it does not directly target these 
groups. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion 
of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). However, Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States are sufficient to establish AG ¶ 8(b). He has lived in the 
United States since 1991. He has been a citizen since 2010. His wife, children, and one 
sibling are in the United States. He owns his home in the United States. He has worked 
overseas for two defense contractors in support of the U.S. military, at times in volatile 
situations, since November 2010. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s 
proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead 
to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
7 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Applicant’s ties to Pakistan are outweighed by his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. I am confident that he will resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family connections. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   Withdrawn 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
   
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
   
 
_______________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
