 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02714 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 15, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 28, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided a timely response 
to the FORM with six attachments. Absent objection, these are collectively marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence. The Government’s exhibits, 
 
2 
 
 
identified as GE 1 through 5, are admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on March 27, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted 18 of the 22 allegations in the SOR. He denied the delinquent 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.m, and 1.v. Applicant claims to be unfamiliar or unaware 
of these three debts, and states he paid off the debt alleged in ¶1.n.1 Applicant claims 
that the mortgage debt alleged in ¶1.a, was assigned to his ex-wife as part of their 
divorce agreement. She lived in the mortgaged home with Applicant’s son. Applicant 
signed a quitclaim deed for that house in January 2014. She allowed it to default and go 
into foreclosure proceedings.2 Applicant stated most of the SOR debts stemmed from 
his divorce. He also provided supporting information consisting of six documents, 
including the quitclaim deed, attached to his Response.3 After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
           .    
  Applicant is 44 years old. He has taken some college courses. Applicant retired 
from the Army after honorable service from 1992 to 2013, including three combat tours.4 
He is divorced from his first wife. They were married from 1992 to 2010. Applicant pays 
her, the mother of his two children, $1,135 per month out of his retirement check.5 This 
has significantly reduced his monthly income. He is now separated from his second 
wife. They have been married from 2011, and have initiated divorce proceedings. He 
has been employed by a federal contractor since May 2013.6 Applicant reports having a 
previous secret security clearance since 2003 with no issues.7  
             
  Applicant disclosed his delinquent debts in section 26 of his July 2014 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also known as his security clearance 
application (SCA). Applicant claimed to have garnishments withdrawn from his 
retirement check each month, for a delinquent debt owed to Defense Finance 
Accounting Service (DFAS).8 Indeed his Retiree Account Statement shows that $445.98 
                                                          
1 GE 2, Answer to SOR.  
 
2 GE 5. 
 
3 AE A, attachments include three character reference letters; a quitclaim deed; a January 23, 2014 letter 
on a law firm’s letterhead including a breakdown of child support payments owed; and, a two page DFAS 
Retiree Account statement.  
 
4 AE A, two page response to FORM.  
 
5 AE A, two page response to FORM. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 3 at page 38. 
 
8 GE 3 at p. 41, and AE A attachments.  
  
 
3 
 
 
is deducted for the garnishment, and $689.40 is deducted from Applicant’s pay check 
each month for his first wife.9 He also disclosed a delinquent debt owed to his bank after 
his truck was repossessed in April 2014. He claimed to be working with his bank to 
arrange payments.10 He has not produced evidence of these arrangements, or 
payments to his bank. He also explained in section 26 that he lost $1,100 per month in 
basic assistance for housing (BAH) when his wife dropped back to one class in her final 
semester of college. The Post 9-11 GI Bill required that she take a full course load in 
order to qualify for the BAH.11 Applicant ascribes “a bad divorce in 2010” as the reason 
for his financial problems.12  
 
  Applicant provided three character reference letters which all attest to his 
honesty, reliability and work ethic. He is obviously trusted and highly respected by all 
members of his organization. He previously served honorably for over 20 years in the 
Army, including three combat tours. As he stated in his Response to the FORM, “my 
credit is a result of a bad divorce from 2010.” However, he has now incurred more 
recent, significant expenses associated with his latest divorce proceedings that were 
ongoing at the time of his Response.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
9 AE A, attachments.  
 
10 GE 3 at p. 42. 
 
11 GE 3 at p. 42. 
 
12 AE A, two page response to FORM.  
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to 18 of the 22 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He 
claims to have paid SOR ¶ 1.n in full, but provided no evidence. Applicant, claims to be 
unaware of three of the alleged delinquent debts. They are all reflected in his credit 
reports. Thus, the burden is on Applicant to address them. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances; and     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 Applicant disclosed his delinquent debts in his SCA and he expressed his intent 
to “put more focus and money into clearing my delinquent accounts within the next 2 - 3 
months” in his response to the FORM in August 2016. Yet, Applicant has produced no 
evidence that he has followed through on any of this. He did produce the quitclaim deed 
which convinces me that SOR ¶ 1.a is a mortgage that went to his ex-wife with the 
house. Therefore, he has resolved the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. He provided no 
documents or evidence to show progress on payments, or mitigation regarding the other 
21 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ ¶ 20(a), 20 (b) and ¶ 20(c) do not apply.   
 
 
 
   
    
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant had a superb career in the Army. He is trusted and highly respected by 
his colleagues in his organization. His divorce(s) and child support payments, may be 
circumstances beyond his control. Yet, Applicant has not demonstrated that he has 
acted responsibly to address his resulting debts. Applicant’s finances remain a security 
concern. There are ample indications that Applicant’s financial problems are not under 
control. He has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraph 1.a.                                For Applicant 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.b -1.v:              Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
  
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
     _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
     Administrative Judge 
 
 
