 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00536 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement, 
criminal conduct, personal conduct, and financial considerations. Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On September 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated May 22, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), J (Criminal 
Conduct), E (Personal Conduct), and F (Financial Considerations) and detailed reasons 
why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement notarized December 11, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on April 27, 2016, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM 
on May 4, 2016. A response was due by June 3, 2016. As of April 6, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) had not received a response to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on April 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to drug involvement (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) and criminal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. through 
2.d.), as well as most of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 
4.a., 4.b., and 4.d. through 4.f.) in the SOR. He failed to address the allegations pertaining 
to personal conduct. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, 
and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
with his current employer since May 2001, initially as a custodian (May 2001 until 2008) 
and currently as a utility helper. He is a 2000 high school graduate. He has never served 
with the U.S. military. He was granted a secret security clearance in May 2001, with 
subsequent reinvestigations, with his most recent renewal taking place in February 2009. 
He has never been married.  
 
Criminal Conduct, Drug Involvement, and Personal Conduct2  
 
Applicant has a substantial history of conduct as a justice-involved individual, 
commencing in July 2007, and continuing through at least June 2013. Included in that history 
are various incidents, mostly fueled by his consumption of alcohol and use and possession 
of illegal drugs, which led to arrests and charges. The SOR alleged five such incidents:  
 
                                                          
2 General source information pertaining to Applicant’s criminal conduct and drug involvement discussed below 
can be found in the following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 1; Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 12, 2014); 
Item 6 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated October 12, 2013); and Item 1 (Applicant’s 
Answer to the SOR, dated December 11, 2015).  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.d. and 3.b.): In July 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged (1) with 
driving under the influence (DUI) liquor, drugs, vapors, combo – a misdemeanor; and (2) DUI 
with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of .08 or more – a misdemeanor. He was found guilty of 
charge (1). He was sentenced to a fine and ten days in jail. The remaining charge was 
dismissed.3  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.c. and 3.b.): In September 2007, after consuming seven beers and two to 
three shots of liquor at bars during a four to five hour period, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with extreme DUI, BAC .15 or more – a misdemeanor. He was found guilty of the 
charge. He was sentenced to a $5,000 fine, jail work-release for 180 days, probation for 24 
months, and his operator’s license was revoked for one year. He subsequently attended 
numerous sessions of an alcohol education program in 2009.4 
  
(SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 3.b.): In December 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
violation of promise to appear – a misdemeanor. The charge was subsequently dismissed.5 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 3.b.): In June 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with failure 
to appear 1st degree – a felony. The charge was subsequently dismissed.6 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 3.a.): In June 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) 
narcotic drug possession/use – a felony; and (2) drug paraphernalia possession/use – a 
felony. At the time, he was in possession of approximately one gram of cocaine. Charge (1) 
was reduced to narcotic drug violation – a felony, and charge (2) was reduced to drug 
paraphernalia violation – a felony. Applicant was found guilty of both reduced charges and 
sentenced to 18 months’ probation, ordered to attend a drug education program, and fined 
$2,000. After nine months of probation, Applicant chose to spend three months in the county 
jail in an effort to return to work earlier than originally anticipated. He attended the drug 
education program from October 2012 until February 2013.7 
 
 Applicant has a lengthy history of substance abuse, with his preferred substance 
being cocaine, and to a much lesser degree, marijuana. He initially experimented with 
cocaine as a high school sophomore, in about 1998, when out of curiosity at a party, he 
snorted one “line” of cocaine that was furnished to him by a friend. During the period 
between his sophomore and senior years, he purchased cocaine from a classmate (whom 
he refused to identify), and again snorted a “line” of cocaine. He did not resume any 
relationship with cocaine until October 2012.8  In October 2000, out of curiosity at a party, 
he took one and one-half “hits” from a marijuana cigarette. It made him feel paranoid, and 
he did not enjoy it, so he never used it again.9 
                                                          
3 Item 6, supra note 2, at 2; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
4 Item 6, supra note 2, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 6; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
5 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
6 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
7 Item 6, supra note 2, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 5; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
8 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 3.a., 3.b., and 3.d.): Applicant contends that he is afflicted 
with a debilitating disease, and because of his condition, he was placed on medical or 
sick leave on several occasions. He was on sick leave and very depressed over his 
condition when friends (whom he refused to identify) started furnishing him cocaine. 
During the period from October 2012 until at least April 2013, Applicant possessed and 
used cocaine on multiple occasions, estimated by Applicant to be five occasions. 
Although he had previously been granted a security clearance, he did not believe he 
would be able to return to work, so he continued to snort up to two lines on each occasion. 
To his surprise, he was recalled to work in April 2013 (not February 2013, as alleged in 
the SOR). The week he returned, he was selected for a random urinalysis. Because he 
had used cocaine only two days before the test, the results come up positive for cocaine. 
He was suspended, and may have been terminated from his job, but with the assistance 
of his union representative, he was recalled, as the incident was treated as a first 
offense.10 A week after his reinstatement, Applicant again went on medical leave, a status 
in which he remained until May 2014. Since his return to work, Applicant was administered 
two random urinalyses, both of which came up clean.11  
 
Financial Considerations12 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose in November 2007 when he stopped making 
payments on his truck loan following his September 2007 DUI. The vehicle was 
repossessed in January 2008. It was sold at auction, leaving a $10,000 deficiency. 
Subsequently, during a period in which he was on medical leave, Applicant’s health 
insurance coverage purportedly lapsed, and he was not aware of the lapse. Other 
accounts became delinquent, either because he had insufficient funds to make his 
monthly payments or because he simply forgot about them. During his interview with an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in June 2014, 
Applicant contended that he is meeting all of his financial obligations.13 
 
 The SOR identified six purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as reflected by his June 2014 credit report, his December 2014 credit report, 
or his e-QIP. Those debts, totaling approximately $11,811, and their respective current 
status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below:  
 
                                                          
9 Item 3, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
10 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
11 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
12 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 1; Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated 
June 5, 2014); Item 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 31, 2014); and Item 3, supra note 2. 
  
13 Item 3, supra note 2, at 9. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
 There are three medical debts that were placed for collection in the amounts of 
$1,140 (SOR ¶ 4.a.), $62 (SOR ¶ 4.d.), and $210 (SOR ¶ 4.f.) that remain unpaid.14 There 
is an Internet account with an unpaid balance of $304 that was placed for collection (SOR 
¶ 4.b.), and it remains unpaid.15 There is an electric utility account with an unpaid balance 
of $95 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 4.c.),16 and although Applicant contends that 
he paid it,17 he offered no documentation, such as a receipt, cancelled check, or account 
register, to support his contention. There is the aforementioned $14,000 credit union 
vehicle loan upon which Applicant ceased making monthly payments in November 2007 
that was placed for collection and the vehicle was repossessed. After the repossession 
and subsequent auction, Applicant was responsible for the remaining $10,000 deficiency, 
an amount that remains unpaid (SOR ¶ 4.e.).18  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
Furthermore, Applicant did not explain his failure to contact his creditors since he was 
interviewed in June 2014, nearly three years ago, in an effort to resolve the above 
accounts, all of which remain unresolved. Because he failed to submit any information 
pertaining to his current finances, including monthly budget, income, expenses, savings, 
etc., it is impossible to assess the status of his finances to determine if his financial 
problems are under control 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
14 Item 5, supra note 2, at 8-9; Item 4, supra note 2, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 8; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2-
3. 
 
15 Item 5, supra note 2, at 8; Item 4, supra note 2, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 8; Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
16 Item 5, supra note 2, at 8; Item 4, supra note 2, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
17 Item 1, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
18 Item 2, supra note 1, at 29; Item 3, supra note 2, at 7-8. 
 
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”23 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
                                                          
21 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
23 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
24 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in AG 
& 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, 
narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition),” is potentially disqualifying. In 
addition, under AG ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use” may raise security 
concerns. Similarly, AG ¶ 25(c) may apply where there is “illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia.” In addition, “any illegal drug use after being granted 
a security clearance” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25(g). 
 
Applicant’s multi-year history of substance abuse involved repeated use and 
possession of cocaine, some isolated purchases of cocaine, and the possession of drug 
paraphernalia. He used cocaine after being granted a security clearance. He was arrested 
in 2012 for drug-related charges and convicted of reduced drug-related charges. He 
attended a court-mandated drug education program. Nevertheless, in 2013, after 
participating in a random urinalysis, the test registered positive for the presence of 
cocaine. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), and 25(g) have been established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
 
8 
                                      
 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is  
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
[a public trust position] for any violation. 
Also, the “satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but 
not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and 
a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional,” may apply under AG ¶ 
26(d). 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant’s most recent use of an 
illegal substance (cocaine) purportedly occurred in April 2013 – four years ago – his 
purchase, possession, and use of cocaine took place initially in his high school years, but 
more importantly and recently from October 2012 until at least April 2013, after he had 
been granted a security clearance. He continued using cocaine following his 2012 drug-
related arrest and conviction, and even after he had attended the court-mandated drug 
education program. Applicant’s purported abstinence from cocaine use is viewed 
favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it. However, Applicant has not 
furnished a reasonable basis for ignoring federal and state drug laws and policy, but 
instead resorted to cocaine use because he was supposedly depressed over an 
undocumented medical condition. In addition, because of his reluctance in identifying the 
sources of his cocaine supply, it is impossible to determine with any degree of certainty 
that Applicant has disassociated from drug-using associates and contacts. In the absence 
of positive character evidence, all of the above factors continue to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” security 
concerns may be raised. Applicant’s history of alleged criminal conduct, covering a 
decade, consists of five incidents involving criminal charges, arrests, convictions, and 
dismissals, for a variety of actions. In addition, there was his repeated use of cocaine. AG 
¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
9 
                                      
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Similarly, AG 
¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement.”  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s five alleged incidents of 
criminal conduct involving arrests and charges, as well as his repeated use and 
possession of cocaine, occurred over a decade, with the most recent incident (the use of 
cocaine) occurring in April 2013. In reality, but not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s 
previous purchase, possession, and use of cocaine occurred even before his initial arrest 
in 2004. As a result of his conduct, Applicant went to jail and to court; he underwent two 
court-mandated education programs; he paid fines; he lost his operator’s license; and he 
was placed on probation. Regardless of the disposition of the charges or the punishment 
ordered, Applicant continued his criminal behavior. The 2012 conviction for drug-related 
charges did not dissuade him from continuing to use cocaine until he was caught by a 
random drug urinalysis in April 2013. 
 
While there is evidence that certain charges have been dismissed or otherwise not 
prosecuted, those dismissals and non-prosecutions do not, without substantially more, 
necessarily reflect that Applicant did not commit the individual offenses charged. 
Generally, the passage of time without recurrence of additional criminal activity can be 
construed as some evidence of successful rehabilitation. However, with respect to 
Applicant’s misconduct, the criminal activities have continued over time. While a person 
should not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the past, in this instance the 
past is relatively recent, and the concerns about future criminal conduct are continuing.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(c), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 16(e), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 Applicant’s five arrests between 2004 and 2013 involved high-risk and illegal 
behavior that got him into trouble with the police and the courts. His repeated use of 
cocaine after he had been granted a security clearance reflects a conscious disregard for 
his fiduciary responsibilities to avoid such situations. Considering Applicant’s history of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of those mitigating conditions apply. 
His repeated conduct shows an absence of law, rule, and fiduciary compliance that is 
relatively recent and serious. In the absence of some significant emotional and attitudinal 
changes by Applicant, it appears that such overall behavior is likely to recur. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems initially arose in November 2007 when 
he stopped making payments on a vehicle loan. The vehicle was repossessed. He 
ignored other accounts that became delinquent, and they were placed for collection. AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
11 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” In addition, under 
AG ¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.”25  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Because of the nature, frequency, and 
recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties, I am unable to conclude that it 
occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” While Applicant commented on his medical 
condition (but failed to submit documentation to support the presence of such a condition), 
and noted his inability to drive because he lost his driving privileges following a DUI 
conviction, his only reference to his bills was that he could not pay them or he forgot about 
them. Applicant offered little evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of his debts. 
Without substantially more, the loss of driving privileges does not equate to a justification 
for not paying bills. In the absence of any financial information from him regarding the 
specific reasons for his inability or failure to pay his debts, and without attributing any 
specific factors to that inability, I am unable to determine if his financial problems were 
caused by conditions that were largely beyond his control. There is no evidence of 
Applicant ever receiving financial counseling. In addition, in the absence of information 
regarding Applicant’s current finances, it is impossible to conclude that his financial 
problems are under control. There is little evidence to indicate efforts to contact his 
creditors to arrange repayment plans, even after the OPM investigator interviewed him in 
June 2014, nearly three years ago. Applicant appears to have acted imprudently and 
                                                          
25 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
irresponsibly. Applicant’s actions, or inactions, under the circumstances confronting him, 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.26 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.27    
    
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with his current employer since May 2001. He was initially granted a secret security 
clearance in May 2001, with subsequent reinvestigations, and his most recent renewal 
occurred in February 2009. He has abstained from further cocaine abuse since April 
2013.  
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a justice-involved individual whose history of criminal conduct took place over 
a multi-year period. Included in that history are various incidents that led to criminal 
charges, arrests, convictions, and dismissals, for a variety of actions. He was jailed, fined, 
placed on probation, required to attend education programs, and he lost his driving 
privileges for one year. He repeatedly used cocaine even after he had been granted a 
security clearance. He does not pay his bills. The combination of Applicant’s actions and 
explanations cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
26 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
27 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
    
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.e.:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a. through 4.f.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
