 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04015 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
April 20, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his state income tax returns for tax years 2010 and 
2011. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2008, which was dismissed in 2009. He is 
alleged to be delinquent on two consumer debts totaling $457, and Federal and state 
tax debts exceeding $15,128. Applicant recently filed his delinquent state tax returns 
and has resolved one delinquent account. He failed to disclose his debts, bankruptcy, 
and failure to file state taxes on his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP.) Concerns about his judgment and trustworthiness remain 
unmitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed e-QIP. On January 31, 2016, 
the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations, and E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
On August 1, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer),1 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
19, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on October 13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 19, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through M, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record 
was left open for Applicant to submit additional documents, and on January 9, 2017, he 
submitted AE N and AE O. Department Counsel had no objections for AE N and AE O, 
and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since 2014. Applicant is married and he has three adult children. 
(GE 1; AE F; Tr. 21-22.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR under Guideline F, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
in 2008, and this proceeding was dismissed in 2009, which means the debts were not 
discharged (SOR ¶ 1.a). He is alleged to be delinquent on two consumer debts totaling 
$457 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). He also owes his state taxation authority $3,128 (SOR ¶ 
1.b), and the Federal government a tax debt of $12,000 (SOR ¶ 1.e). Additionally, 
Applicant failed to timely file his state income tax returns for tax years 2010 and 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.f). Under Guideline E, Applicant was alleged to have deliberately falsified his 
e-QIP by not disclosing his failure to file his state tax returns and having undisclosed 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 2.a). Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f. He 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 2.a. His delinquent debts are documented in the credit 
reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to underemployment in 2007, due 
to a decline in the housing market. Prior to the economic decline, he worked 50 hours a 
week and made approximately $3,000 per month. In 2007, he only worked 15 to 20 
hours per week, significantly reducing his income. He found another job that provided 
full-time hours in 2007, but he did not make as much as he did the previous year. As a 
result of his declining income, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2008. On the 
advice of his bankruptcy attorney, he stopped making his plan payments in 2009, and 
the Chapter 13 proceeding was dismissed by the court in May 2009. (GE 2; AE F; Tr. 
22-27, 47, 53.)  
  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s Answer was submitted by his Attorney on August 1, 2016. A prior submission is contained in 
AE M.  
 
3 
 
 A tax lien was entered against Applicant in 2013, for unpaid state taxes in the 
amount of $3,128. The tax lien stemmed from his failure to file state income tax returns 
in 2010 and 2011. He testified that he thought he filed them electronically but, through a 
technical glitch, the filing did not go through for either year. Applicant claimed he 
learned of his state tax debt for tax years 2010 and 2011 in 2013, when the lien was 
filed against him. He testified he reached an installment agreement with the state 
taxation authority in 2014. (GE 2; AE B; AE F; AE H; Tr. 30-35.) A computation for tax 
year 2010 shows that the debt for that tax year has been resolved. (AE F.) The 
evidence excludes a computation for tax year 2011. In a 2016 installment agreement 
with the state taxation authority, Applicant agreed to pay $25 per month until his 2011 
state tax debt is resolved. He testified he still owes the state approximately $2,000. 
Applicant’s credit report dated March 15, 2016, reflects that the state tax lien has been 
released, but does not give a release date. (AE D.) Applicant filed his 2010 and 2011 
state income tax returns on January 6, 2017. (AE N; AE O; Tr. 30-35, 47-49, 54.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a vehicle loan in the approximate amount of $401. 
Applicant fell behind on his vehicle payments in 2007 when his hours at work were 
reduced. In February 2012, Applicant paid this debt in full. He presented a letter from 
this creditor and a copy of the vehicle title as proof this debt is resolved. (GE 2; AE F; 
AE G; AE M; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a collection agent for a cable company in the amount 
of $56. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2013. (GE 3.) Applicant testified 
that he contacted this creditor to arrange repayment, but the creditor was unable to 
locate the account. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for unpaid Federal 
taxes, interest, and penalties totaling approximately $12,000. An account statement 
from the IRS shows that he owed: $3,883 for 2008; $3,264 for 2009; $1,048 for 2010; 
$1,630 for $2012; and $2,563 for 2013. He established an installment agreement with 
the IRS in 2014 to resolve each of those tax years. From July 7, 2014, to July 13, 2015, 
he paid the IRS a total of $630 toward the resolution of these debts, as follows: $30 on 
December 30, 2014; $150 on January 29, 2015; $150 on February 27, 2015; $150 on 
April 12, 2015; and $150 on June 1, 2015. He produced no other documentation to 
show he is current with his installment agreement payments to the IRS. (GE 2; AE C; 
AE F; AE I; AE M; Tr. 36, 50-52.) 
 
 On Applicant’s e-QIP, signed on August 26, 2014, he indicated “no” to all of the 
questions in section 26 pertaining to his financial status. The questions include: “In the 
last seven (7) years have you filed a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy 
code?;” In the past seven (7) years have you failed to file or pay Federal, state, or other 
taxes when required by law or ordinance?;” “In the past seven (7) years have you had a 
lien placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts;” “You are 
currently delinquent on any Federal debt;” and “You are currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt?” Applicant testified that he did not intentionally provide false 
answers, but that he thought that because he was making payments on his state and 
Federal tax debts, that they were not delinquent. He also indicated he did not get a 
 
4 
 
credit report, so he was not aware of his consumer delinquencies. His explanations are 
not credible. At the very least, he knew he had filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2008; and 
he did not give a credible explanation as to why he was not aware in 2014 that he had 
not filed his 2010 and 2011 state tax returns. He should have disclosed that information 
on his e-QIP. His omissions were intentional. (GE 1; Tr. 44, 55.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he has approximately $1,000 left over at the end of each 
month after meeting his monthly financial obligations, including his state and Federal tax 
payments. (Tr. 37-42.) He signed a statement of intent promising to timely file his 
Federal and state taxes in the future. (AE A; Tr. 46.) He documented that he attended 
financial counseling in 2016. (AE L.) His landlord indicated he has never been late on 
his rent (AE K.)  
 
 Applicant’s lead wrote a letter in support of Applicant’s security clearance 
application. It indicated Applicant has never had any behavior problems and is well liked 
by his peers. He finds Applicant “extremely trustworthy.” (AE K.) Applicant received a 
spot award from his employer in 2015 for excellent work performance. (AE J.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness. His 2008 Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filing and current unresolved debts establish a nine-year history of financial 
problems, as documented by the credit reports in evidence. Applicant has resolved the 
debt identified in subparagraph 1.c. He has made some payments toward the tax debts 
in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.e, but failed to provide documentation to show he is current 
on his payment arrangements with, or the current balances owed to, the state and 
Federal governments. He has been unable or unwilling to address the debt in 
 
6 
 
subparagraph 1.d. Moreover, Applicant failed to file his state income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 and 2011, as required by law, until after the hearing in January 2017. The 
evidence raises security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Applicant failed to produce sufficient 
evidence to show his tax debts are being resolved. He has not demonstrated that future 
financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant established that his delinquencies and failure to file his state tax returns 
were caused, in part, by events that were beyond his control including his under 
employment and a software glitch. However, he failed to establish that he has acted 
responsibly under these circumstances. He has been fully employed since 2007. He did 
not address his debts in a timely manner. Further, despite his awareness of his 
outstanding 2010 and 2011 state income tax returns after 2013, he failed to file them 
until January 6, 2017, three days before the record closed. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) 
has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided evidence of financial counseling. However, there are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control, despite 
that counseling. Additionally, Applicant’s "[f]ailure to file tax returns [until three days prior 
to the close of the record] suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with 
 
7 
 
well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules 
and systems is essential for protecting classified information.”2 Further, Applicant’s 
history of not fulfilling his legal obligation to file state income tax returns demonstrates a 
lack of the judgment and reliability required for access to classified information.3 The 
Appeal Board has noted: "A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an Applicant's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information as reflected in the Guideline 
F concerns that were alleged."4 Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) was not 
established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his 2008 Chapter 13 bankruptcy; his 
delinquent debts; his failure to file and pay his outstanding state tax obligations; and his 
failure to pay his Federal tax obligation. Security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) were 
established. 
 
  
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016.) 
3 ISCR Case No. 98-0608 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2000). 
4 ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them were established in this case. Applicant did not make 
prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification or concealment. He waited until he 
was interviewed and confronted by an OPM investigator to disclose his bankruptcy 
filing, his Federal and state tax debts, and his unfiled taxes. He provided no information 
that indicates he was ill-advised in completing his e-QIP. Falsifying material information 
is a serious offense and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in 
judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, he failed to take responsibility for his actions. He 
has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof concerning his personal 
conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant’s lead finds him trustworthy. He received a performance-based award in 2015. 
He has completed some financial counseling and has no new debts. These are factors 
that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, Applicant’s financial problems remain largely 
unresolved. While he was given the opportunity to document the status of his Federal 
and state debts, he failed to produce evidence of any recent payments or evidence of 
current balances owed on his delinquent taxes. The evidence he presented 
documenting payments under an offer and compromise in 2015, show that he missed at 
least two payments. He failed to establish a track record of repaying his IRS or state tax 
debts. Further, he provided false information on his e-QIP.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
