 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-03657 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges, and the record establishes 
delinquent federal income taxes for 2011, 2012, and 2013 totaling $9,011. The SOR also 
alleges six delinquent debts totaling $ 18,269. He did not provide sufficient documentation 
showing resolution of four SOR debts. Applicant inadvertently failed to disclose his 
delinquent debts on his July 16, 2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86) or security clearance application (SCA). Personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated; however, financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On July 16, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 4) On March 24, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 
2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
                                         
 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations and personal 
conduct guidelines. 
 
On April 5, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested a 
decision without a hearing. (Item 3) On June 21, 2016, Department Counsel completed 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On June 29, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM. On April 13, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. The case file consists of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7) Applicant did not 
object to any of the Government exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.  
(Item 3) He also made some partial admissions, and he provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional 
findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old, and he has been employed as a security officer since 
July 2014.2 From 1999 to 2003, he served in the Army and he received an honorable 
discharge. In 1995, he graduated from high school, and he has taken some college 
courses. In 2010, he married, and his children were born in 2009 and 2012. There is no 
evidence that he violated security rules or used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of 
employer performance evaluations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s October 29, 2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI) indicates Applicant had delinquent state and federal tax debts for 
2011, 2012, and 2013 due to periods of unemployment. (Item 5) He was unemployed for 
three months in 2011, from September 2009 to July 2010, and from November 2007 to 
February 2008. (Item 4) He owes about $7,000 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 
and he is on a $125 monthly payment plan. (Item 5) He discussed most of his other SOR 
debts including two vehicle repossessions. (Item 5) Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SCA, OPM PSI, and SOR response. The status of his 
delinquent SOR debts is as follows:  
 
¶ 1.a alleges Applicant owes the IRS $3,142 for tax year 2011. Applicant said all 
taxes for 2011 were paid in full; however, he did not provide proof of payment or resolution 
of this debt. (Item 3) 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s July 16, 
2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) and his 
October 29, 2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (Items 4, 5) 
 
3 
                                         
 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege Applicant owes the IRS $3,189 for tax year 2012 and $2,680 
for tax year 2013. Applicant said he had an installment agreement with the IRS to make 
$125 monthly payments. (Item 3) He is current on the agreement. (Item 3) He did not 
provide documentation showing the current status of the two tax debts.  
 
¶ 1.d alleges a charged-off debt for $8,260. He acknowledged responsibility for 
this debt; however, he did not provide any other information in his SOR response. (Item 
3) His Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview indicates this 
debt resulted from a repossessed vehicle. (Item 5) This delinquent debt is listed on his 
April 6, 2016 credit report, the most recent credit report of record. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant denied five SOR debts and said they were resolved and removed from 
his credit report: ¶ 1.e alleges a collection debt for $729; ¶ 1.f alleges a 
telecommunications-collection debt for $1,019; ¶ 1.g alleges a collection debt for $300; ¶ 
1.h alleges a collection debt for $429; and ¶ 1.i alleges a bank debt resulting from a 
repossessed vehicle for $7,532. (Item 3) He believed his grandfather paid the $7,532 
debt. (Item 5) These five debts do not appear on his 2015 or 2016 credit reports. (Items 
3, 7)  
   
 Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise 
resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. He did not describe financial counseling. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, 
or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination 
based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 4) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On his July 16, 2014, Applicant completed his SCA. (Item 4) His SCA asked for 
disclosure of repossessed vehicles, debts in collection, charged-off debts, and debts over 
120 days delinquent. (Item 4) Applicant answered, “No” to all questions about delinquent 
debts. He disclosed his financial problems during his October 29, 2014 OPM PSI. (Item 
5) He explained that he hurried through his SCA and inadvertently failed to list his 
delinquent debts. (Item 3) He made several mistakes on his SCA, including failing to list 
two of his children and information about his siblings. (Item 4, 5)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
 
4 
                                         
 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response. The record establishes the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
                                            
3A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
  
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant described unemployment problems. These circumstances beyond his 
control adversely affected his finances. I have credited Applicant with mitigating all of the 
delinquent SOR debts except for ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.    
 
The record establishes Applicant has four unresolved delinquent debts totaling 
$17,271. Applicant did not provide enough details with documentary corroboration about 
what he did to address his SOR tax debts and to pay the debt resulting from his 
repossessed vehicle in SOR 1.d. He did not provide documentation relating to any of 
these four SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish 
maintenance of contact;5 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was 
responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving four of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all 
the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
8 
                                         
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”6 
 
Applicant’s July 16, 2014 SCA asked for disclosure of repossessed vehicles, debts 
in collection, charged-off debts, and debts over 120 days delinquent. Applicant incorrectly 
answered, “No;” however, he disclosed his financial problems during his October 29, 2014 
OPM PSI. He explained that he hurried through his SCA and inadvertently failed to list 
his delinquent debts. He made several mistakes on his SCA, including failing to list two 
of his children and information about his siblings. Applicant was very careless, and he 
made mistakes on his SCA. His errors and omissions on his SCA do not establish AG ¶ 
16(a). Applicant refuted the allegation that he intentionally failed to disclose his delinquent 
student loans on his SCA with intent to deceive. AG ¶ 17(a) (stating “the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts) and AG ¶ 17(f) (stating “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability”) are also applicable. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
                                            
6The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                         
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 39 years old, and he has been employed as a security officer since 
July 2014. From 1999 to 2003, he served in the Army and he received an honorable 
discharge. He has taken some college courses. There is no evidence that he violated 
security rules or used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance 
evaluations.  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by unemployment, which occurred 
most recently in 2011. Applicant did not provide specific details about how these 
circumstances beyond his control negatively affected his finances. 
 
The record establishes Applicant has four unresolved delinquent debts totaling 
$17,271, including delinquent federal income taxes for 2011, 2012, and 2013 and the 
debt resulting from his repossessed vehicle. Applicant provided insufficient corroborating 
or substantiating documentary evidence of payments and established payment plans for 
his SOR debts. He did not provide a detailed plan about how he intended to resolve all of 
his delinquent SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial responsibility and judgment 
and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information about 
inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial progress is necessary to 
mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, financial consideration 
security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
 
10 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
