 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06735 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 28, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 31, 2016, he confirmed 
that he wanted to change his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to me on December 1, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 20, 2016, scheduling the 
 
2 
 
hearing for January 25, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor at the same location since 1998. He 
seeks to retain a security clearance. He has two associate’s degrees and a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in 1998. He is married with a stepchild.1 
 
The SOR alleges eight student loans in collection totaling $57,628. Applicant 
admitted owing all the loans. He has made inconsistent payments on the loans 
throughout the years, and because of interest, the amount owed is more than double 
what he borrowed. It is also less than what was owed in April 2015, when the balance 
totaled $60,829.2 
 
Applicant’s pay was garnished $222 every two weeks from September 2015 
through January 2017 to pay his student loans. In March 2016, the IRS withheld $2,338 
from his 2015 income tax refund and applied it to his student loans. In September 2016, 
Applicant entered into a repayment agreement under the loan rehabilitation program in 
which he agreed to pay $107 per month for nine months, which was in addition to the 
amount that was being garnished from his pay. The garnishment ended in January 2017 
after he made five payments under the rehabilitation program. In January 2017, the 
balance on the loans was $50,944.3  
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for allowing his student loans to languish. He 
reported his defaulted student loans on his security clearance application in September 
2014. He credibly testified that he intends to increase his payments to $600 per month 
and continue to pay his student loans. He stated that he has matured and learned a 
valuable lesson. He is recently married, and they both want financial stability. He knows 
that the loans have to be paid, and that failure to do so could adversely affect his 
security clearance and a job that he loves.4 
 
Applicant’s manager testified to Applicant’s excellent job performance, reliability, 
judgment, and trustworthiness. He also testified that Applicant has “matured and grown 
over the years.”5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 35, 39; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-19; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE C. 
 
3 Tr. at 22; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A-I, K, L. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-38, 51-53; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 40-49. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant neglected his student loans, and they went into default. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The balance on Applicant’s student loans totaled $60,829 in April 2015. His pay 
was garnished $222 every two weeks from September 2015 through January 2017 to 
pay the loans. In March 2016, the IRS withheld $2,338 from his 2015 income tax refund 
and applied it to his student loans. He made five $107 payments between September 
2016 and January 2017 under the loan rehabilitation program. In January 2017, the 
balance on the loans was $50,944. He credibly testified that he intended to increase his 
payments to $600 per month and continue to pay his student loans.  
 
5 
 
Applicant receives minimal credit in mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) 
because most of the payments were involuntary. Nonetheless, he has reduced the 
balance on his student loans by almost $10,000. He has a viable plan to pay his student 
loans. There are clear indications that the student loans are being resolved and are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant acknowledges that he 
neglected his financial responsibilities when he failed to pay his student loans. He owes 
about $10,000 less in student loans than he did in 2015. Applicant is incentivized to pay 
his student loans. More importantly, I am convinced that he realizes it is the right thing 
to do. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
