 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  (Redacted) )   ISCR Case No. 15-05618 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the risk of foreign influence raised by her father-in-law’s 
residency in the People’s Republic of China (China). Neither Applicant nor her spouse 
has close relations or regular contact with him. Applicant, a lifelong resident citizen of the 
United States, can be counted on to act in U.S. interests. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security 
concern under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant 
or continue a security clearance for her. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on April 21, 2016, and she 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
 
 2 
administrative judge. On July 14, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On July 22, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for 
August 10, 2016. With the agreement of the parties, on August 5, 2016, I changed the 
start time for the hearing scheduled for August 10, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Before the introduction of any evidence, 
the SOR was amended at the Government’s request without any objection from the 
Applicant, as set forth below. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and seven 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-G) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
and her spouse testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on August 18, 2016. 
At the Government’s request and without any objection from Applicant, I also agreed to 
take administrative notice of pertinent facts related to China.1 The Government’s 
request for administrative notice, dated June 25, 2016, was based on excerpts from the 
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive’s Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage for 2009-2011; from the U.S. Defense 
Department’s annual reports to Congress for 2012, 2013, and 2014 concerning military 
and security developments in China; from the U.S. Department of Justice a press 
release from June 9, 2016; from the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission’s 2014 Report to Congress; and from the U.S. State Department’s China 
(Includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau) 2015 Human Rights Report and its Country 
Information-China dated December 2, 2015. The facts administratively noticed are set 
forth in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 The SOR initially alleged that Applicant’s fiancé’s father is a dual citizen of the 
United States and a resident of China (SOR ¶ 1.a). When she responded to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the allegation, explaining that she married her fiancé in March 2016 
and that his father has been a citizen solely of the United States since approximately 
2000. She indicated that her father-in-law has resided in China since 2006, but he owns 
a home in the United States and is considering retiring to the United States. The SOR 
was amended at the Government’s motion, as follows: 
 
1.a. Your spouse’s father is a citizen of the United States and is a resident 
of China. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
                                                 
1The Government’s formal request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record. I agreed to take administrative notice, subject to my obligation to make accurate 
and timely assessments of the political landscape in foreign countries when adjudicating Guideline B 
cases. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). 
 
 3 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has her doctorate degree in applied science. She 
has been employed since September 2014 by a university-affiliated laboratory that has 
contracts with the DOD. She seeks her first DOD security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 39, 44.)  
 
A lifelong resident citizen of the United States, Applicant met her spouse while 
she was in graduate school in April 2009. He was pursuing his post-graduate education 
at the same university. They became a couple in 2011 and married in March 2016. 
(GEs 1, 3; Tr. 41, 59.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in China. He immigrated to the United States with 
his mother in 1989 when he was four years old. They left China two days before the 
Tiananmen Square massacre and joined his father, who was already in the United 
States. (Tr. 57-58, 61.) An only child, Applicant’s spouse was raised and educated in 
the United States, and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen.2 (Tr. 52, 65, 75.) His 
parents separated when he was in seventh grade, and they divorced when he was in 
high school. (Tr. 70.) Following his parents’ divorce, Applicant’s spouse lived with his 
mother, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen employed as a lecturer at a private university 
in the United States. (Tr. 40, 51, 62.) His mother remarried a Hong Kong native, who 
has since retired from a career in the U.S. defense industry. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 In 2000, Applicant’s spouse’s biological father became a U.S. naturalized citizen. 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s father-in-law formally applied to renounce his 
Chinese citizenship at that time, but China does not recognize dual nationality.3 (AE C; 
Answer.) In 2006, Applicant’s father-in-law moved to China and married a resident 
citizen of China. (Tr. 71.) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was in contact with his father on and off after his parents’ 
divorce. (Tr. 61.) In part to reflect his close relationship with his mother, Applicant’s 
spouse legally changed his name in November 2006. He changed his first name to the 
English name that he had used informally for years, and he took his mother’s last name. 
(AE B; Tr. 64.) Applicant’s spouse earned his doctorate degree in late 2012. (Tr. 59.) In 
January 2013, he began two years of post-doctoral research at a private university in 
the United States. (Tr. 59.) 
 
 In August 2013, Applicant traveled with her spouse to China for approximately 
two weeks. His mother was in China as a faculty advisor with some students on an 
exchange program. Applicant and her spouse spent most of their time with his mother. 
                                                 
2 The date of his naturalization is not in evidence. 
 
3 The U.S. State Department reports that China does not recognize dual nationality. If a traveler has dual 
nationality or otherwise has ethnic or historical ties to China, Chinese authorities may possibly assert that 
he or she is a Chinese citizen and deny access to U.S. consular representatives. Moreover, the State 
Department advises those traveling to China who are naturalized U.S. citizens or have a possible claim to 
Chinese citizenship that Chinese law and practices related to the determination and loss of Chinese 
citizenship may require formal renunciation of Chinese citizenship or cancellation of a household register. 
See the State Department’s Country Report-China, updated on September 23, 2016, which may be 
accessed at https://travel.state.gov/content/passports.en/country/china.html. 
 
 4 
They visited tourist attractions, including the Great Wall and the Forbidden City. During 
the last three days of their trip, Applicant accompanied her spouse to his paternal 
grandmother’s home. They were joined there by his father, who spent a few days with 
them. Applicant and her spouse met his father’s new wife and some other paternal 
family members. (Tr. 42-43, 66, 71-72.) His father has five siblings, four of whom are 
resident citizens of China. (Tr. 65-66.) Applicant relied on her spouse, who speaks 
Mandarin Chinese, to translate for her when conversing with his extended family 
members. (Tr. 43, 68.) Applicant and his spouse had only routine contact at the border 
with Chinese officials and were not approached by any representative of the Chinese 
government during their trip to China. (Tr. 46, 73.) 
 
 In May 2014, Applicant’s father-in-law came to the United States for a 
conference. He visited with Applicant’s spouse for a few days during a layover, and 
Applicant joined them for a few meals. (Tr. 43, 54-55, 77.) Her father-in-law expressed 
happiness with his new wife. (Tr. 77.) 
 
 Shortly after Applicant was awarded her doctorate degree, she began her current 
employment. On November 18, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy 
of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). She listed her spouse as a 
person who knew her well. As her then significant other of several years, they had 
cohabited for a few months in late 2011 and were currently in close contact. She also 
indicated in part: 
 
While he and his immediate family are U.S. citizens, he and I visited with a 
number of foreign nationals in China in 2013 who are close friends of his 
family. We also met with a couple of these family friends more recently in 
the U.S. Currently I don’t know any of their full names and have not really 
communicated with them directly (since most of them do not speak 
English) but there is a reasonable chance I will continue to be in contact 
with some of them. 
 
Applicant listed her foreign travel in the last seven years, including to China in August 
2013. (GE 1.) 
 
 On February 4, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) partially about her contacts with foreign 
nationals. Applicant volunteered that her significant other has “family friends” living in 
China.4 They visited them in China in August 2013, and she also had in-person contact 
with some of them in the United States in 2014. She expressed her intention to report 
any continuing contact with foreign nationals to security officials. (GE 2.) 
 
                                                 
4 The summary of Applicant’s interview does not include the names of the friends or the extent of 
Applicant’s spouse’s contacts with the friends who reside in the United States. There is no indication that 
Applicant was asked specifically about her spouse’s family members, including his father in China. See 
GE 2. 
 
 5 
 In January 2016, Applicant’s spouse began working as an assistant professor at 
a university in Canada. (Tr. 53, 60.) Of the 20 to 30 applications he submitted for a 
tenure-track position, he had two interviews. Given the amount of resources the 
Canadian university offered him for his research, it made sense for him to accept the 
offer. He has a temporary work permit in Canada and does not intend to obtain 
Canadian citizenship. He hopes to find work in the United States in the future. (Tr. 60.) 
 
 On February 25, 2016, Applicant submitted a detailed response to foreign 
influence interrogatories from DOHA. She reported her engagement to her spouse and 
his employment in academia in Canada since January 2016. She explained that they 
have daily contact and intend to marry by late March 2016. Applicant also disclosed her 
father-in-law’s residency in China. Contact with him was solely through her spouse, who 
had reestablished cordial but not particularly close relations with his father. Applicant’s 
spouse was in contact with his father once every few months by email or phone and 
less than once a year in person. Applicant added that her father-in-law has visited her 
spouse when he is in the United States for business reasons, and she was present for 
one such visit in 2014. She disclosed her and her spouse’s in-person contact with his 
father when they were “already in China on vacation” in August 2013. Applicant also 
indicated that her spouse had some paternal aunts and uncles, two cousins (one 
employed as a wedding planner), and a grandmother in China but that she does not 
know the names of her spouse’s extended family members. Her spouse had had no 
contact with them in the five years before their trip to China in August 2013 and no 
contact since then. Applicant disclosed that her mother-in-law had a dozen friends in 
China, two or three of whom had worked at a Chinese university. Applicant first met 
them when in China in August 2013. She and her spouse had dinner in the United 
States in 2014 with one of his mother’s friends from China. Applicant expressed no plan 
to see her mother-in-law’s Chinese friends in the future, but she did not rule out the 
possibility. Applicant also provided detailed information about some foreign citizens with 
whom she had interacted or collaborated while pursuing her graduate studies or had 
contact through her spouse. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant is close to her own parents, who are both U.S. native citizens. She was 
living with them as of her hearing in August 2016. (Tr. 40.) Applicant also has a close 
relationship with her mother-in-law. (Tr. 41.) She has a distant relationship with her 
father-in-law, based in part on what her spouse shared about his father and on her 
limited contact with his father. (Tr. 42.) She has had no in-person contact with her 
father-in-law apart from her trip to China in August 2013 and her father-in-law’s visit in 
May 2014. She understands that one responsibility of a security clearance is to report 
any suspicious activities, and she would have no qualms about reporting any suspicious 
activity on her father-in-law’s part. (Tr. 20, 43-44.) Her spouse is in contact with his 
father about twice a year, usually by texting. (Tr. 74-75.) He denies any sense of 
obligation to his father. (Tr. 62-63.) He does not know whether his father owns any 
property in China, but is aware that his father owns a condominium in the United States. 
(AE C; Tr. 50, 67.). His father has expressed an intention to retire to the United States 
and purchase a home in southern California. (Tr. 75-76.) To his knowledge, his father 
has not had any affiliation with China’s government and his father’s business is not 
 
 6 
government or intelligence related. (Tr. 69, 75.) His father operates with his new wife a 
consulting business in China teaching people to be successful in the media. (AE C; Tr. 
52, 69, 71, 78.)  
 
 Applicant’s spouse contacted his father sometime in the summer of 2016 to 
obtain an affidavit. (Tr. 74.) On July 25, 2016, Applicant’s father-in-law “declare[d] under 
penalty of perjury under the laws of the United States of America” that he currently 
works as a consultant in China; that he has been solely a citizen of the United States 
since 2000 and not exercised Chinese citizenship since then; and that he has never 
been employed by or been a member of a foreign (non-U.S.) government, military, or 
entity owned or operated by a foreign government, including China. (AE C.) His current 
U.S. passport was issued on April 21, 2010. (AE A.) 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor described Applicant as “an ideal employee in all 
respects.” Applicant has been conscientious, performs excellent technical work, and 
works well independently. Most of Applicant’s colleagues have classified projects. While 
limited in her duties because of no security clearance, Applicant has made “important 
and significant contributions to several efforts of national importance.” (AE D.) 
 
 A senior professional colleague at the defense laboratory, who is familiar with 
Applicant’s work since November 2015, likewise attested to Applicant’s exceptional 
work. Applicant has strictly adhered to their employer’s security policies and procedures 
and been proactive in informing personnel that she does not have a security clearance. 
He believes Applicant has no affiliation or preference for China or any other foreign 
country and “strongly feels that [Applicant] has the character and honesty requisite with 
a security clearance.” (AE E.) 
 
 Applicant also proved to be a key contributor to a research project led by a 
professional colleague. She had earned the high regard of her colleagues for the rigor 
and efficiency of her work before she joined the research project team in May 2015, and 
she proved to be a “willing and enthusiastic participant, mentoring junior staff and rolling 
up her sleeves to meet critical deadlines.” Applicant handled sensitive unclassified 
information appropriately. Applicant’s colleague highly recommends Applicant for a 
security clearance. (AE F.) 
 
 A close friend, who met Applicant in graduate school in 2009, worked closely with 
her on a number of projects over the years. He has the utmost respect for Applicant and 
her ethics. In his opinion, she has demonstrated that she can be trusted to handle 
professional technical information and personal information discretely and respectfully. 
He considers Applicant to be a loyal, law-abiding citizen of the United States. (AE G.) 
  
 
 7 
Administrative Notice 
 
 After reviewing U.S. government publications concerning China and its foreign 
relations and mindful of my obligation to consider updated information, I take 
administrative notice of the facts requested by the Government as supplemented by the 
following facts: 
 
China is an authoritarian state with paramount authority vested in the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP). CCP members hold almost all top government and security 
apparatus positions. In all important government, economic, and cultural institutions in 
China, the CCP ensures that party and state policy guidance is followed. Recognizing 
the increasing role that China plays in world affairs, the United States seeks to build a 
positive, cooperative, and comprehensive relationship with China and welcomes a 
strong, peaceful, and prosperous China. 
 
China considers the first 20 years of this century to be a window of strategic 
opportunity for the country to focus on economic growth, independent innovation, 
scientific and technical advancement, and growth in renewable energy. Bilateral trade 
between the United States and China has grown to where China is the third largest 
export market for U.S. goods and the United States is China’s largest export market. At 
the same time, China sees itself as a strategic competitor of the United States. 
 
China continues to pursue a long-term, comprehensive military modernization 
program, which it views as essential to achieving great power status. Initially designed 
to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity regional 
conflicts, China’s military modernization program has become more focused on 
investments for a range of missions beyond the country’s periphery. China has made a 
substantial investment in domestic defense research and development. Even so, China 
fills the knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and commercial research by engaging 
in large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary information. 
China aggressively pursues U.S. economic information and technology, leveraging 
foreign investments, commercial joint ventures, academic exchanges, the experience of 
repatriated Chinese students and researchers, and state-sponsored industrial 
espionage to increase the level of technologies and expertise available to support its 
military research, development, and acquisition. China blends intelligence and non-
intelligence assets and frequently seeks to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with 
family ties to China who can use their insider access to steal trade secrets from U.S. 
companies. Since the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-scale 
cyber espionage against the United States. A 2012 Defense Science Board report 
identified dozens of U.S. defense critical system designs compromised by Chinese 
cyber actors, including designs pertaining to an air defense system, fighter and 
reconnaissance aircrafts, helicopters, a missile defense system, and a combat ship. 
U.S. corporations and cyber-security specialists continue to report computer network 
intrusions originating from Internet Protocol addresses in China. Some Chinese 
nationals in the United States have acted as procurement agents or intermediaries to 
obtain key national security and export-restricted technologies or controlled equipment 
 
 8 
for China in violation of U.S. laws and export controls. In June 2016, a California 
resident was convicted of conspiring with a person in China to illegally acquire and 
export to China fighter jet engines, an unmanned aerial vehicle, and related technical 
data to China. 
 
China has a poor human rights record. Repression and coercion markedly 
increased in 2015 against organizations and individuals involved in civil and political 
rights advocacy and public interest and ethnic minority issues. Lawyers that handled 
cases deemed “sensitive” by China’s government were targeted for harassment and 
detention. Hundreds of lawyers were interrogated, investigated, and in many cases 
detained in secret locations for months without charges or access to attorneys or family 
members. Individuals and groups regarded as politically sensitive by authorities faced 
tight restrictions on their freedom to assemble, practice religion, and travel. Authorities 
resorted to extralegal measures, such as enforced disappearance and house arrest, to 
prevent public expression of critical opinions. Public discourse on the Internet and in 
print and other media was censored and tightly controlled. As in previous years, citizens 
did not have the right to change their government and had limited right of redress 
against official abuse. 
 
The U.S. State Department continues to advise that foreign visitors in China may 
be placed under surveillance by security personnel; their hotel rooms, telephones, and 
facsimile machines may be monitored; and their personal possessions, including 
computers, may be searched without their knowledge or consent. Chinese security 
personnel have been known to detain and deport U.S. citizens sending private 
electronic messages critical of the Chinese government. In recent years, U.S. citizens 
and other foreign nationals visiting or residing in China have been interrogated or 
detained for reasons related to “state security.” Dual U.S.-Chinese nationals and U.S. 
citizens of Chinese heritage may be at a high risk of facing such special scrutiny. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
 9 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 10 
As alleged in the amended SOR, Applicant’s father-in-law is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen who lives in China. Not every foreign contact or tie presents the heightened risk 
under AG ¶ 7(a), which provides: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of 
the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or 
dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
Despite China’s increased international involvement in recent years and its considerable 
trade with the United States, it is an authoritarian state with an extensive, pervasive 
history of engaging in economic and technological espionage against the United States. 
The country’s poor human rights record continues to hinder relations between the 
United States and China. 
 
Applicant credibly asserts that she lacks close ties of affection or obligation to her 
father-in-law, with whom she has had limited contact. She spent a few days with her 
spouse visiting with his father during their trip to China in August 2013. She and her 
spouse shared a few meals with his father in May 2014 in the United States. She has 
had little opportunity to develop a personal relationship with her father-in-law, and her 
opinion of him has been colored by the strained relations that her spouse had with his 
father as a teenager and young adult. Applicant does not have a personal relationship 
or contacts with her father-in-law independent of her spouse’s tie and contacts.  
 
Applicant’s connection to her father-in-law through her spouse, who has 
reestablished cordial relations with his father in recent years, establishes AG ¶ 7(b), 
which provides as follows: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Even though Applicant and her spouse have been living apart because of their 
respective employments, they have been a couple since February 2011, married in 
 
 11 
March 2016, and have daily contact. Applicant’s spouse changed his name in 
November 2006 to take the last name of his mother, in recognition of the close feelings 
of affection he has for his mother. It can also be seen as a repudiation of the father-son 
tie. However, he has had cordial relations with his father in the past few years. His 
father has made the effort in recent years to see him when he is in the United States. 
When Applicant and her spouse went to China in August 2013, they spent a few days 
with his paternal relatives, including his father. Additionally, Applicant’s spouse has 
contact with his father a few times a year, usually by texting. While his father has never 
worked for the Chinese government, its military, or intelligence services, and he is a 
U.S. naturalized citizen, he works as a consultant apparently teaching persons to be 
successful in the media. 
 
Concerning issues in mitigation, China’s ongoing aggressive targeting of U.S. 
defense technology and intellectual property and its poor human rights record make it 
difficult to apply AG ¶ 8(a), which provides: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
Applicant has no ties of her own to China that would undermine her allegiance to 
the United States. Born, raised, and educated in the United States, she is currently 
living with her parents while her spouse is on the faculty at a Canadian university. She 
has no foreign income or assets of her own. While her spouse currently lives and works 
in Canada, he is in Canada with a temporary work permit and has no plans to obtain 
Canadian citizenship. He has no financial assets in China. The persons to whom 
Applicant is closest (spouse, parents, and mother-in-law) are all U.S. citizens.  
Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships in the United States considerably 
outweigh the connection she has to her father-in-law through her spouse, who has a 
respectful but not close or intimate relationship with his father. AG ¶ 8(b) applies: 
 
 (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Furthermore, AG ¶ 8(d), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so 
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation,” is established with respect to Applicant’s contact with her 
father-in-law. The foreign influence concerns are adequately mitigated. 
  
 
 12 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine 
adjudicative process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).5 The analysis under Guideline B is 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant demonstrated personal integrity by candidly detailing to the DOD her 
foreign contacts and ties through her spouse. Her professional colleagues endorse her 
for security clearance eligibility for her dedication, the excellent quality of her work, and 
her appropriate handing of sensitive unclassified information. She has been careful to 
advise personnel at work about her lack of a security clearance. In weighing the whole-
person factors in a foreign influence case, the Appeal Board has stated: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant’s facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that 
an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to 
classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because 
of facts and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 
01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
 Applicant has no say in her father-in-law’s decisions to reside in China and to 
operate a consulting business instructing people how to be successful in the media. 
Given the Chinese government’s control and influence over the media, the risk of undue 
foreign influence cannot be completely ruled out. However, Applicant can control her 
response to the security risk that exists through her spouse’s tie to his father. Applicant 
has credibly indicated that she would have no problem reporting any suspicious activity 
by her father-in-law to security officials. After considering all the facts and 
circumstances, I find it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security 
clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
  
                                                 
5 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 13 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
