 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04621 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on April 21, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on April 29, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided no response to the 
FORM. The Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.m and 1.n. She 
also provided supporting information in a one-page undated letter attached. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
                      .    
  Applicant is 59 years old. She obtained her bachelor’s degree in 1990. She has 
been married and divorced twice, and has one adult daughter. She has been                      
employed by a federal contractor since May 2009. She reports having a secret 
clearance from 2003 – 2013 with no issues. She was laid off in November 2008, and 
remained unemployed until May 2009.  
   
            SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege that Applicant owes the federal government for 
delinquent taxes in the approximate amount of $41,260 because she failed to timely file 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 to 2013. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted her indebtedness to the federal government for delinquent taxes, but 
she disputed the amount owed. Further, she asserts that she did, in fact, file returns for 
each of the tax years in question, albeit late.3 She also admitted to five of the other 15 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling more than $30,000.  
 
 Applicant disclosed her late federal income tax returns in question in section 26 
of her July 2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also known as her 
security clearance application (SCA). Applicant claimed to have worked out a payment 
plan with the IRS in August 2014, but she did not provide a copy of the installment 
agreement or proof of payments. Applicant, in explaining her tax situation, stated in the 
SCA that “my ex-husband said he filed and didn’t. It forced subsequent delinquencies 
which I am in the process of clearing up.”4 Further, she had her home repossessed in 
October 2009 because “I had a daughter in college and I was unemployed.”5  
 
The only explanation offered for her failure to timely file the income tax returns in 
question was that her employer at the time, a company which was supposedly owned 
by her stepmother, filed bogus W-2’s concerning Applicant.6 So, Applicant was 
confused about whether, or how, to file her income tax returns. Applicant was also 
                                                          
3 GE 1, Answer to SOR. 
 
4 GE 2 at p. 35. 
  
5 GE 2 at p. 39. 
 
6 GE 3, at p. 2. 
 
3 
 
 
reluctant to implicate her stepmother. She claims to have since filed the income tax 
returns in question but submitted no corroborating evidence.  
 
 Although Applicant claims that she was unaware of them, her credit reports, 
reflected her delinquencies regarding several other debts including a judgment against 
her by a condominium unit owner’s association (SOR ¶ 1.c). The other judgment 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.l by the same creditor, is a duplicate debt. SOR ¶ 1.l is resolved for 
Applicant. These delinquent debts were beyond her control due to unemployment and 
college tuition for her daughter. Nonetheless, there is no evidence that Applicant has 
acted responsibly to resolve them. Indeed, Applicant stated earlier that the judgements 
against her were the “result of my being irresponsible with my finances.”7 
 
                                             Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
7 GE 4 at p. 2.  
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant admitted she did not file her federal income tax returns as required. 
She provided no documents or evidence to show progress on payments, or mitigation 
regarding the other 15 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant endured a period 
of adverse circumstances, including six months of unemployment, and college 
expenses for her daughter. She also had a dispute with her former spouse about whose 
responsibility it was to file the tax returns, and she claims that her previous employer 
filed bogus W-2’s. However, she has offered no evidence to support any of these 
contentions. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances; and     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
  Applicant disclosed her failure to timely file her tax returns in her SCA and she 
claims to have since filed the federal income tax returns in question. Yet, Applicant has 
produced no evidence that she has since complied with her responsibilities and is up to 
date on filing income tax returns. AG ¶ ¶ 20(a), 20 (b) and AG ¶ 20 (c) do not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. She has not met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:             Against Applicant 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.l.                                For Applicant 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.m-1.q                         Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
