KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not raise an issue of harmful error.  Our scope of authority is limited to
cases in which the appealing party has raised such an issue.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 15-04628.a1
DATE: 04/18/2017
DATE: April 18, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04628
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 17, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 17, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In his Appeal Brief, Applicant states that he is appealing the Judge’s decision because he
feels that he did not make a strong enough case for the CAF to allow him to continue to hold a
clearance.  He also reiterates the statements he made in response to the government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) and offers new evidence in the form a narrative statement that he has
developed a budget and intends to pay off his debts within 18 months.  Applicant does not point to
any specific error in the Judge’s decision.
 
The Board does not review a case de novo. Additionally, it cannot receive and consider any
new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Board’s authority to review a case is limited
to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has
not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the
Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
