 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02544 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 On January 12, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties at hearing 
and post-hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. 
(Government Exhibits 1 – 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits A – Q.) The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on January 19, 2017, and the record closed on February 10, 2017.2 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 Prehearing correspondence and the notice of hearing were marked Appellate Exhibits I and II. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 51, is married and has two adult-age children. He served in the U.S. 
military from 1984 to 2000, deploying overseas several times. For a time, he held a top 
secret clearance as part of a prestigious military unit directly supporting the executive 
branch. He filled out the paperwork to reenlist and continue his military career, but due to 
an administrative error the paperwork was not forwarded and he was discharged upon 
completion of his last enlistment contract. He received an honorable discharge for his 16 
years of service. He recently started receiving VA benefits for a service-connected 
disability. (Tr. 24-25, 39-40) 
 
Applicant is an aircraft mechanic and has been with his current employer since 
about 2002. He submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2012 in connection 
with a periodic reinvestigation of his clearance. His job position requires that he maintain 
a clearance. (Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant started having difficulty paying his bills in the early 2000s. He did not 
have a sufficient amount in taxes withheld from his paycheck and was unable to pay the 
taxes that he owed. He entered into successive installment agreements with the IRS to 
satisfy his back taxes, but the resulting decrease in disposable income left him unable to 
pay other household debts. His pay was garnished by at least one of his creditors. He 
also incurred increased expenses helping one of his children pay their college-related 
expenses and for a short time in 2016 was the sole wage earner in the family. He 
presented documentation post-hearing confirming the installment agreements he entered 
into with the IRS and the payments he has made over the years to satisfy back taxes for 
tax years 2004 – 2007, 2013, and 2015. He also presented documentation showing that 
his wages were garnished in 2010 to satisfy a $4,700 delinquent credit card account.3 
(Tr. 25-28, 40-41, 46-47; Exhibit 2; Exhibits A – Q) 
 
The SOR lists six delinquent consumer-related debts totaling about $18,000.4 
Applicant owes nearly half of this amount for two charged-off credit card accounts. (SOR 
1.a and 1.c) He stopped paying on these accounts in either 2002 or 2003. During his 
clearance interview in February 2013, Applicant stated that his plan was to contact the 
creditor for both accounts and set up a payment plan. He expected to start making 
payments the following month. As of the hearing, Applicant had not contacted the creditor 
for these two accounts and had not settled, paid, or otherwise resolved these debts. (Tr. 
29-30, 42-45, Exhibit 2 at 3; Exhibits 3 - 4) 
 
The other major debt listed in the SOR is for a deficiency balance of approximately 
$7,500 that Applicant owes for his former car. (SOR 1.b) The car was repossessed in 
                                                          
3 The tax-related financial problems and past garnishment were not alleged and, thus, were not considered 
as a disqualifying matter. They were only considered in the context of Applicant’s explanation as to the 
circumstances that led to his present financial circumstances. 
 
4 The three medical debts referenced in SOR 1.g – 1.i, totaling about $150, are immaterial in assessing 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility and are resolved in his favor.  
 
3 
 
 
approximately 2013, and subsequently the creditor secured a judgment against Applicant. 
Applicant testified that the creditor had agreed to let him pay the judgment through a 
payment plan, but he has not heard from the creditor in three to four years. He provided 
no documentation to corroborate this aspect of his testimony. (Tr. 30-32, 42-45; Exhibit 
1; Exhibit 2 at 2-3; Exhibit 3 - Exhibit 5) 
 
The other three relatively minor consumer debts listed in the SOR total less than 
$700. (SOR 1.d – 1.f) Applicant acknowledges he owes these delinquent debts and 
claimed at hearing that he or his wife had paid at least one of them. He provided no 
documentation showing that he had addressed these three debts or that they had 
otherwise been resolved. (Tr. 32-33, 42-45; Exhibit 3 - Exhibit 4) 
 
Applicant’s current bi-weekly net salary is between $1,200 and $1,600. His wife 
works as a manager at a retail clothing store and earns approximately $265 - $300 a 
week. Applicant estimates that, after paying recurring monthly expenses, he has about 
$400 or $500 in disposable income each month to pay debts and address unexpected 
household expenses. He has not received financial or credit counseling. He is unaware 
whether his employer provides such counseling through an employee assistance 
program. He blames his own “pride and ignorance” for not seeking professional advice in 
how to better manage his finances. (Tr. 37-38, 42)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
 
4 
 
 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 As stated in the relevant portion of AG ¶ 18 quoted above, the security concern at 
issue is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial issues might be 
tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to delinquent 
debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to 
protecting classified information.5 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant defaulted on two of the SOR debts over ten years ago. He has continued 
to accrue delinquent debt to the present day.6 He promised during his February 2013 
clearance interview to address some of the SOR debts, but took no action. He has been 
aware since at least October 2015, when he received the SOR, that his delinquent debts, 
including the three minor SOR debts totaling less than $700, raised a security concern. 
He again took no action to address these debts. Applicant recognizes that he needs to 
obtain professional financial or credit counseling, but has yet to do so.7 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted 
access to classified information.8 Applicant failed to meet his burden.  
 
                                                          
6 Applicant is likely no longer legally liable for the two credit card debts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.c. 
However, the Guideline F concern is not dependent on whether or not a debt remains legally enforceable. 
Instead, a judge examines the circumstances under which the debt arose and Applicant’s response to it in 
assessing whether a security concern presently exists. Here, Applicant’s failure to address the six SOR 
debts at 1.a – 1.f and lack of evidence that his financial situation is under control raise serious concerns 
about his eligibility for continued access to classified information. Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-02903 
at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017), where the Board cited to favorable evidence showing that the applicant took 
responsible action vis-à-vis his debt and the debts unenforceability in remanding an unfavorable decision.  
 
7 ISCR Case No. 14-04926 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (“A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill legal 
obligations, such as . . . addressing other debts in a reasonable manner, does not demonstrate the high 
degree of reliability required of those granted access to classified information.”). 
 
8 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for many years and honorably served in 
the military. I found him credible and sincere in his desire to resolve his delinquent 
accounts. However, he has yet to take the necessary responsible steps to put his financial 
house in order despite being aware for some time that his delinquent accounts placed his 
security clearance eligibility (and continued employment that is dependent on maintaining 
a clearance) in jeopardy. Applicant may in the future be able to re-establish his security 
clearance eligibility by showing that he is responsibly managing his personal finances in 
the manner expected of all clearance holders. At present, however, the questions and 
doubts about his eligibility, which were raised by his financial situation, remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.i:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
