 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01544 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and initially requested a decision on the written record. He subsequently requested 
a hearing to establish his continued eligibility for a security clearance.2 
 
 On January 12, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties at hearing 
and post-hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 Applicant’s request for a hearing is attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit (App. Exh.) I. 
 
2 
 
 
(Government Exhibits 1 – 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits A – Q.)3 The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on January 17, 2017, and the record closed on January 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is married. He and his wife have five children, but are empty nesters. He 
served in the U.S. military from 1977 to 1981, and received an honorable discharge. He 
has worked as a contractor for the federal government and held a security clearance for 
over 30 years. His security training is up-to-date. He submitted favorable character 
references from his company’s human resources director and facility security officer. (Tr. 
28-30, 50-53; Exhibits F, I) 
 
The SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling about $22,000. Applicant addressed 
the debts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.e. He fell behind on the credit card debts 
referenced in SOR 1.b – 1.d in approximately 2005. Shortly after the SOR was issued, 
Applicant met with a financial counselor who advised him not to contact the creditor 
holding the now charged-off credit card debts because they had fallen off his credit reports 
and were uncollectible as the state statute of limitations had run. Applicant was further 
advised by the financial counselor that if he did contact the creditor and made 
arrangements to pay the credit card debts, such action would negatively impact his credit. 
These charged-off credit card debts total about $20,000 and remain unresolved.  
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems started around 2000, when he and 
his former wife separated. She moved out of state with their daughter and they divorced 
in 2002. The divorce was costly and his expenses further increased due to the travel cost 
associated with visiting his daughter out of state. He started relying on credit cards.  
 
Applicant missed a payment on one of the cards in 2004 or 2005, which drove up 
the interest rates on his accounts. He was unable to make the minimum payments on the 
three credit card accounts referenced in SOR 1.b – 1.d, and stopped paying on the 
accounts. He was offered a settlement of approximately $12,000 to resolve the $20,000 
in credit card debt. He testified that he could have paid the settlement by taking out a loan 
from his 401(k) retirement account, which has a balance of approximately $200,000; but 
elected not to. He has taken out several 401(k) loans over the years to fix his house or 
pay-off debt. He did not have an outstanding 401(k) loan as of the hearing. He has 
experienced health problems over the past few years that have negatively impacted his 
current financial situation. (Tr. 33-47, 52-53; Exhibit Q) 
 
Applicant resolved other debts not listed on the SOR in 2012. He did so shortly 
before submitting his recent security clearance application. Specifically, he resolved a 
$5,000 credit card and a $1,200 judgment. The judgment was resolved through wage 
garnishment. Applicant disclosed these two resolved debts on his clearance application, 
but did not list the $20,000 in past-due credit card debt. (Tr. 39-46, 53-56; Exhibit 1; 
Exhibit L; Exhibit J) 
                                                          
3 Prehearing correspondence, notice of hearing, and case management order were marked and are 
attached to the record as App. Exh. II – IV. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant earns an annual income of about $64,000 as a federal contractor. 
Together, Applicant and his wife earn approximately $90,000 annually. He owns a home 
and has made extra monthly payments towards paying down the mortgage. As of the 
hearing, the mortgage balance on his home was down to $4,000. Applicant testified that 
his home is worth approximately $85,000. His recent credit reports reflect a favorable 
credit score (high 700s to low 800s). (Tr. 51-52; Exhibits G, M-Q) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 As stated in the relevant portion of AG ¶ 18 quoted above, the security concern at 
issue is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial issues might be 
tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to delinquent 
debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to 
protecting classified information.4 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant incurred the delinquent credit card debts in 2005. Although the costly 
divorce from his ex-wife and the added expense to visit his daughter out of state were 
matters largely beyond his control that negatively impacted his financial situation, he had 
the means to resolve the debts and decided not to. Instead, he walked away from the 
debt and waited for the statute of limitations, as well as the time period the credit agencies 
could lawfully report the debt, to run. He used the financial windfall from not paying the 
credit card debts to improve the balance in his retirement savings account and reduce the 
balance on his mortgage. Thus, notwithstanding Applicant’s claims to the contrary, the 
evidence shows that he had the financial means to pay his debts and chose not to. He 
improved his financial situation at the expense of paying his lawful obligations. His actions 
towards the financial obligations represented by the credit card debts raise continuing 
concerns that he would treat his security obligations in a similar manner.5  
 
The preceding is not intended to suggest or imply that a person seeking to attain 
or maintain a security clearance is required to take out a loan or withdraw money from 
their 401(k) retirement account to pay a debt. Such action would be financially imprudent 
and short sighted. Here, however, Applicant had the financial means to pay his credit card 
debts referenced in SOR 1.b – 1.d without tapping into his 401(k) account, as evidenced 
by his ability to make extra monthly payments to bring down the balance on his mortgage. 
He chose not to use his disposable income to pay his credit card debt and instead used 
it to improve his financial position. A person who places their personal goals over their 
financial obligations does not demonstrate the reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment required of those granted the privilege of holding a security clearance.6 
 
Also, Applicant’s failure to list his delinquent credit card debt on his recent SCA 
and instead only disclose the two debts he had resolved, further detracts from the 
favorable record evidence, including the apparent healthy state of his finances at 
present.7 I have considered the somewhat recent financial advice Applicant received 
about not contacting the new creditor holding the $20,000 in uncollectible credit card debt. 
However, I have given this information less weight in resolving the security concerns at 
issue because of the circumstances leading to the debts uncollectible status.  
 
                                                          
5 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017), where an applicant who experienced 
similar matters beyond his control accrued a large amount of delinquent debt, but who took responsible 
action to address the debt. The Board cited to this favorable evidence of responsible conduct, coupled with 
the debts unenforceability, in remanding the unfavorable decision.  
 
6 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (“A security clearance represents 
an obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
7 Applicant’s failure to report this information on his clearance application was not alleged in the SOR. Thus, 
it was not considered for disqualification purposes, but was considered in assessing his mitigation case, 
credibility, and whole-person factors. 
 
6 
 
 
An applicant’s reliance on the unenforceability of a debt due to the running of a 
state statute of limitations or the debt falling off a credit report is misplaced, because the 
security concerns raised by delinquent debt are not necessarily mitigated by the debt’s 
unenforceability. Instead, a judge must examine the circumstances that led an applicant 
to default on the debt, an applicant’s efforts to address the debt, and evidence, if any, of 
reform. Here, the circumstances leading to the unenforceability of the $20,000 in credit 
card debt and lack of significant evidence of reform raise doubt about Applicant’s 
continued suitability for a clearance.8  
 
Accordingly, for all the foregoing reasons, I find that the disqualifying conditions 
listed at AG ¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for over 30 years without apparent issue. 
He served honorably in the military and then continued to serve the Government as a 
contractor. He submitted favorable recommendations. Nonetheless, this favorable 
evidence does not fully mitigate the security concerns raised by the evidence. Notably, 
Applicant walked away from his financial obligations (the credit card debts) and then failed 
to report this information as required on his security clearance application. Overall, 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion to continue his eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
  
                                                          
8 See generally ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016) (internal citations omitted): 
 
In this case, the Judge noted that Applicant explained that he did not owe any of the alleged 
debts because they had either been deleted from his credit report or soon would be deleted, 
and he also relied on a state statute of limitations to absolve himself of debts. The Appeal 
Board has long recognized that debts remain relevant for security clearance purposes even 
if they are no longer enforceable due to the running of the statute of limitations or cannot 
be legally listed on a credit report due to the passage of time. We also have held that 
reliance on a state’s statute of limitations does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve 
financial difficulties and is of limited mitigative value. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 15-02957 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2017) (“the absence of unsatisfied debts from 
an applicant’s credit report does not extenuate or mitigate an overall history of financial difficulties or 
constitute evidence of financial reform or rehabilitation.”); ISCR Case No. 15-02957 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 
2016) (in rejecting an applicant’s argument that the unenforceability of a debt due to running of statute of 
limitations resolved security concerns, the Board held: “even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable 
under state law, has been discharged in a bankruptcy, or is paid, the Federal Government is entitled to 
consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy 
the debt in a timely manner.”) 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.e:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
