 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02587 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 25, 2016, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 30, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on April 11, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. On May 11, 
2016, Applicant responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 
17, 2017. On March 16, 2017, I re-opened the record to allow the parties to submit 
additional documents. On March 27, 2017, Applicant submitted additional documents 
and the record closed.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel offers FORM Items 2-4, which are admitted into evidence 
as Government Exhibits (GE) 2-4, without objection. FORM Item 5 is Department 
Counsel’s request for administrative notice and the supporting reference materials. 
Because the SOR allegations are limited to Applicant’s possession and use of his 
Colombia passport and not any foreign contacts, I will take administrative notice of only 
those portions of the reference materials pertaining to the use of Colombian passports. 
FORM Item 5 is admitted for administrative notice as Administrative Notice (AN) I. 
Applicant’s supplemental response to the FORM includes three attachments, which are 
admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-C, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant possessed a valid foreign passport (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
and used that foreign passport to travel to Colombia and to Brazil (SOR ¶ 1.b.). 
Applicant admitted both allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 40 years old. He received a master’s degree in August 2007. He is 
not married and does not have any children.2 He was born in Colombia, and he entered 
the United States in November 1998. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 
2004. He has been employed as an engineer for a DOD contractor since May 2004, and 
he has lived in Mexico since October 2013.3 
 
 A Colombian citizen by birth, Applicant renewed his Colombia passport in 
January 2008. This passport was valid until January 2018. He used this passport to 
travel to Colombia in December 2013 and to Brazil in June 2014. Colombian law 
requires Colombia citizens to use their Colombian passports to enter and exit Colombia. 
On March 23, 2017, he destroyed his Colombian passport, as verified by his facility 
security officer. He has expressed a willingness to renounce his Colombian citizenship; 
however, he has not taken any action to do so.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 My order and the relevant email exchange are admitted into the record as Administrative Exhibit (AX) I. 
 
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 2-4; AN I; AE A-C. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”5 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 
988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 9: “When an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
  
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country.                       
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse 
trustworthiness decision. Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a 
dual national, but rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country 
through actions.”6 
  
 After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004, Applicant renewed his 
Colombian passport in January 2008. This passport was valid until January 2018. AG ¶ 
10(a)(1) applies. 
  
Applicant used his Colombian passport to travel to Colombia in 2013 and to 
Brazil in 2014. Although his use of his Colombian passport was permitted under U.S. 
law, it is well-settled that a lawful course of action may still be significant conduct:7 
 
Nothing in Executive Order 12968, Executive Order 10865, or the 
Directive requires that DOD polices, practices, and procedures in security 
clearance adjudications must be consistent with State Department 
policies, practices, and procedures, explicitly ones that on their face do not 
deal with security clearance adjudications.8   
 
 Applicant’s legal use of his Colombian passport still constitutes “an exercise of 
foreign citizenship” within the context of ¶ 10(a). Whether he used his Colombian 
passport for personal convenience or as required by Colombian law, such actions 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016). 
  
8 ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 6 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
5 
 
constituted significant conduct.9 Applicant’s use of his Colombian passport to travel to 
and from Colombia and Brazil is a benefit based on the exercise of his Colombian 
citizenship. AG ¶ 10(a)(3) applies.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 11(a): dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country;  
 
AG ¶ 11(b): the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
AG ¶ 11(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and  
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant was a Colombian citizen by birth. Although he repeatedly used his 
Colombian passport, even after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2004, AG ¶ 11(a) applies.10 
Applicant repeatedly expressed his willingness to renounce his Colombian citizenship. 
AG ¶ 11(b) applies.  In March 2017, Applicant destroyed his Colombian passport. AG ¶ 
11(e) applies. 
 
 Although Applicant’s use of his Colombian passport was permitted by U.S. law, 
the Appeal Board has held that merely because conduct is legal does not mean that the 
federal government has affirmatively authorized or approved such conduct.11 The State 
Department’s dual nationality notice does not constitute approval by a “cognizant 
security authority” in the context of AG ¶ 11(d). AG ¶ 11(d) does not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has used his Colombian passport since 
submitting his security clearance application and completing his security interview in 
2014. He has destroyed his Colombian passport and expressed a willingness to 
renounce his Colombian citizenship. I find that he has mitigated the foreign preference 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 See id. at 13. 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 12-06885 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2013) (“The Board has concluded that AG 11(a) 
can be applied when an applicant’s dual citizenship falls within the literal language of that mitigating 
condition, regardless of whether the applicant exercised the rights or privileges of foreign citizenship.”). 
See also ISCR Case No. 03-23806 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 2005). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline C and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Prior to submitting his security clearance application, Applicant renewed and 
used his Colombian passport. He has destroyed this foreign passport and expressed a 
willingness to renounce his Colombian citizenship. I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
