 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------  )  ADP Case No. 15-03800 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke him eligibility 
for a public trust position. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from his problematic 
financial condition. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on May 26, 2013.  On December 3, 2015, after reviewing the application 
and the information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons 
(SOR), detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for financial considerations.1 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Jan. 1987), as amended 
(Regulation. In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
 
2 
 
The SOR is similar to a complaint.  Applicant answered the SOR on March 15, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 10, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM).2  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, items one and 
two and items four through six of which are admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits 1, 2 and 4 through 6. Item three is marked as Government Exhibit 3 and is 
discussed below. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on May 31, 2016. 
Applicant’s response to the FORM was due on June 17, 2016.  On June 17, 20 and July 
6, 2017, Applicant responded to the FORM. His responses with accompanying 
documents are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C and are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the June 2013 background investigation. The 
ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.3 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. The footnote is prominently prefaced with a bolded, upper-case notice to 
Applicant and flagging for Applicant the importance of the footnote, which then explains 
the concepts of authentication and waiver. In a case such as this, where Applicant has 
responded to the FORM, it is fair to conclude that Applicant read the footnote, understood 
it, and chose not to object to the ROI. The ROI is, therefore, admissible.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is 32 years old, never married, and is a high school graduate with some 
college credits.  At the time of his SF 86, he had been employed since September 2012 
as a manager of a fitness club.4 Applicant is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a 
position of public trust, because his sponsor provides security and technology services to 
the Department of Defense. Eligibility is necessary, because a job with his sponsor would 
involve access to sensitive but unclassified information.  
 
  
                                                          
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were 
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process. Judge Ra’anan raises a number of pertinent questions 
about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
4 Exhibit 2.  
 
3 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged seven delinquent collection accounts and four 
delinquent medical accounts totaling approximately $18,100.5 Applicant’s handwritten 
answers to eight SOR allegations are, “I deny this debt is still valid,” or “I deny that this 
debt is still valid as it does not appear on my credit report.”6 Attached to his answer is a 
credit report dated February 29, 2016, which does not show any of the SOR debts. In his 
typewritten answer, Applicant admits each debt alleged but states that one or more of the 
Chase debts (paragraphs 1.c., e., and i.) might be duplicates, because he was not aware 
of having more than one Chase credit card.7  
 
Applicant’s financial problems stemmed from being terminated by his employer for 
disciplinary reasons in January 2008.8  Applicant remained unemployed until August 
2009. During that period, Applicant relied on unemployment compensation, which was 
not enough to meet his routine household expenses. Applicant had another period of 
unemployment from August 2011 until September 2012, during which time he again relied 
on unemployment benefits. Applicant became unemployed at that time, because his 
employer lost the contract that he was servicing.9 Applicant admits in his answer that he 
has not made payments on the collection accounts since 2008, due to his then-inability 
to pay. He thought he had no option but to wait for the debts to “fall off” his credit reports.  
 
Applicant’s answer explained that the four medical accounts (paragraphs 1.f. 
through h. and k.) were incurred in September 2011 when he was bitten by a dog in his 
parents’ home. He received emergency room treatment for his injury, and his parents told 
him they would pay for that treatment.  He did not know that his parents failed to pay the 
emergency room medical bills.10 In his response to the FORM, Applicant detailed the 
efforts he made after the SOR was issued and after the FORM was filed to track down 
the creditors or collection agencies holding the SOR debts. He has not been successful.11  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
                                                          
5 Exhibit 1.  
 
6 Exhibit 1, paragraphs 1.a. through f. and paragraphs 1.i. and j.  
 
7 Exhibit 1. 
 
8 Exhibits 1, 2 and 3. 
 
9 Exhibit 2.  
 
10 Exhibit 1.  
 
11 Exhibits A through C.  
 
4 
 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,12 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
                                                          
12 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
5 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information.13 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
condition sufficient to raise a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F.  He has been 
unable to pay his debts and has made no payments on his collection accounts since 
2008, thus triggering AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).14  A trustworthiness adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant's debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
evaluating an applicant's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.15 Applicant’s inability 
to pay his debts was caused by him being terminated by his employer in January 2008 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 18. 
 
14 I find persuasive Applicant’s explanation of his overdue medical accounts, and the Government has not 
offered evidence to rebut that explanation.  The circumstances causing those debts to be overdue (a dog-
bite and his parents’ failure to pay those debts, as promised) were largely beyond Applicant’s control, 
thus triggering AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
15 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).   
 
 
6 
 
for disciplinary reasons.  Therefore, the cause of his loss of employment was not due to 
circumstances largely beyond his control.  AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.16  
 
 Applicant’s answer indicates that he labors under the misapprehension that a debt 
is satisfactorily resolved once it “falls off” his credit reports. The Appeal Board “has long 
recognized that debts remain relevant for [trustworthiness evaluations] even if they  
cannot be legally listed on a credit report due to the passage of time.”17 There are no clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, or that Applicant initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve the debts.  AG ¶¶19(c) 
and (d) do not apply.18 
 
The record creates doubt about Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.19 
Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
show that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant him eligibility 
for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.- e. and i. and j:            Against Applicant 
              
Subparagraph 1.f – h. and k.:                      For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
16 Applicant had another period of unemployment, from August 2011 until September 2012, but that was 
not caused by disciplinary reasons. Although that period of unemployment likely impacted Applicant’s 
financial situation adversely, it was his disciplinary termination in January 2008 that caused his inability to 
pay at issue here.    
 
17 ISCR Case No. 15-0128 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016). See also ISCR Case No. 15-00254 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 26, 2016).  
 
18 The Chase accounts do not appear to be duplicative. The have different account numbers, dates of 
opening, and dates of last activity. Exhibits 4, 5 and 6.  
 
19 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
