 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08476 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. 
His Afghan passport was surrendered to his employer in 2015, and expired in 2016. His 
wife is a permanent U.S. resident, and two children are U.S. citizens. However, he 
retains significant connections to many family members who are still residents and 
citizens of Afghanistan. Applicant failed to mitigate resulting security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 16, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 26, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why the DoD CAF could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.  
 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 8, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 19, 2016, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing on November 17, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2016. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 thorough 
4) into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 11 exhibits (AE A through K) into 
evidence. All Government and Applicant exhibits were admitted without objection. The 
Government also requested administrative notice of facts about Afghanistan, to which 
Applicant had no objection. The request was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) II, and 
administrative notice was taken of the facts stated therein. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on December 15, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.g, concerning his birth-family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
He denied the SOR ¶ 1.a allegation that his wife is also a resident citizen of Afghanistan 
because she had recently obtained U.S. permanent resident status. He also denied the 
SOR ¶ 2.a allegation that he had an Afghan passport because he had surrendered it to 
his employer’s Facility Security Officer (FSO) in June 2015. His admissions are 
incorporated in the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1982. He has been employed, through 
various contractual arrangements, as a linguist supporting U.S. forces in Afghanistan 
since late 2003. He attended two years of university studies in Afghanistan, and said 
that he was awarded an associate’s degree. He immigrated to the United States in 
March 2009, under a special immigrant (SQ1) visa program for Afghan nationals who 
provided more than a year of faithful and valuable service to the U.S. Government, and 
were determined by the Chief of Mission to have experienced, or be experiencing an 
ongoing serious threat as a consequence of that service.1 He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in April 2014. He is married and has two young children. He has no military 
service and has never held a security clearance. (GE 1; GE 2; AE E; AE F; AE J; Tr. 6-
8, 23, 44-46, 49-50.)   
 
Applicant earned a number of commendations for his service as a linguist in 
support of U.S. forces in Afghanistan. A captain and a second lieutenant with whom he 
served in 2010 wrote letters commending his dedication, professionalism, and 
contributions to mission accomplishment. The colonel, for whom he most recently 
performed linguist services in connection with high-level coalition advisor duties, also 
wrote a letter commending his consistently outstanding and trustworthy performance in 
dangerous and sensitive situations during their six months together. (AE C; AE D.) 
 
Applicant has a large number of immediate and extended family members who 
were born as resident citizens of Afghanistan, including his parents, parents-in-law, four 
                                            
1 See 74 Fed. Reg. 61517 (Nov. 25, 2009). 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
brothers, and a sister. He married his wife, an Afghan citizen, in Afghanistan during April 
2011. She first came to the United States in 2014, and received U.S. permanent 
resident status in March 2015. Their daughter was born in Afghanistan in April 2013, 
and their son was born in the United States in May 2015. Applicant purchased a home 
in the United States in 2014, owns a car, and has about $53,000 in bank account 
savings here. He owns no property in Afghanistan. His wife plans to petition to become 
a naturalized U.S. citizen when eligible in April 2018. Their daughter was granted U.S. 
citizenship in 2015. (Answer; GE 1; GE 3; AE A; AE G; AE H; AE I; Tr. 26, 44, 51-54, 
61-65.)    
 
Applicant’s father is currently unemployed, after working in a low-level logistic 
position supporting United Nations landmine clearing operations. He owns the family 
residence in their home city, and 11 acres of unoccupied land in a different province. 
Applicant’s mother works exclusively as a homemaker. His sister is unmarried and 
studying to be a tailor. Two of Applicant’s brothers serve in Afghan government 
positions involving security operations at very high-levels.2 A third brother is disabled, 
unemployed, and lives with their parents. His fourth brother recently graduated with an 
engineering degree and owns a school, where he teaches classes in mathematics and 
engineering. He also lives in the family home, and provides financial support to the 
family members living there. Applicant’s father-in-law used to own a shop but now 
drives a taxi. His mother-in-law is a homemaker. Applicant and his wife communicate 
between weekly and yearly with their various family members in Afghanistan, but do not 
discuss the nature of his work with them. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 54-63.)  
 
Applicant still had his Afghan passport when he completed his February 2015 e-
QIP, having only become a U.S. citizen ten months earlier. He voluntarily surrendered 
that passport to his employer’s FSO in June 2015, and it expired in June 2016. He 
currently has and uses a U.S. passport issued in April 2014. (Answer; GE 1; AE B; AE 
E; Tr. 37-38, 42, 65-67.) 
 
 After Applicant entered the United States with his SQ1 visa in March 2009, he 
worked as a waiter in a restaurant for about four months. He returned to Afghanistan in 
August 2009 to work for his present employer as a contract linguist for U.S. forces until 
February 2011, with a 12-day vacation visit to the United States in September 2010. He 
briefly returned to the United States in February 2011 in order to resign from his linguist 
position. He then went back to Afghanistan in his personal capacity to visit his mother, 
who was ill, and to marry his wife. In June 2011, he returned to the United States and 
was rehired by his employer. He lived at a friend’s house in the United States until 
November 2011, when he returned to Afghanistan to perform linguist duties. In April 
2013 he returned to the United States, and was unemployed until that October, when he 
started work as a retail cashier. In April 2014, he returned to Afghanistan to visit family 
and friends for three to four weeks. In January 2015 he resumed working for his 
employer as a contract linguist, and went back to Afghanistan in March 2015. He 
returned to the United States for nine days in June 2015, after his son was born, then 
                                            
2 The SOR only alleged this concern with regard to one of his brothers. A second brother more recently 
began working in a similar position. More specific description of their duties is not appropriate here.  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
returned with his wife and two children to Afghanistan. According to Applicant (as 
described in AE J), he and his family remained in Afghanistan thereafter, with the 
exception of a three-day visit to the United States in December 2015, a twelve-day visit 
to the United States in May and June 2016, and a planned two-week vacation in the 
United States that began eight days before his hearing in this case. (GE 1; GE 4; AE J; 
Tr. 52-53.)   
 
I take administrative notice of the facts concerning Afghanistan that are set forth 
on pages 3 through 6 of HE II. Highlights include Afghanistan’s continuing problems 
with internal corruption, and threats to U.S. interests from insider attacks, as well as 
from insurgency and extremist networks operating throughout the country. The U.S. 
State Department has issued a Travel Warning against U.S. citizen travel within 
Afghanistan because continued instability, combat operations, and threats by terrorist 
organizations against U.S. citizens make all areas of the country unsafe. (HE II.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heighted risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2014, and his wife was 
granted permanent U.S. resident status in March 2015. His young children are also U.S. 
citizens. However, since coming to the United States in March 2009 on the basis that 
his work with U.S. forces there caused him to experience a serious threat to his safety, 
he has spent significantly more time working and/or visiting family in Afghanistan than 
living or working here. Applicant reported that his wife and children accompanied him 
while he was in Afghanistan between June 2015 and December 2016. They spent only 
three weeks in the United States during that period.  
 
All other members of Applicant’s and his wife’s families are resident citizens of 
Afghanistan, and at least one member of his immediate family works in a high-level 
security position with the Afghan government. These relationships raise security 
concerns about his obligation or desire to assist those family members by providing 
sensitive or classified information, if faced with pressure or coercion from an outside 
source. The presence of active anti-U.S. terrorist operatives and the overall security 
situation that currently exists in Afghanistan create a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, or exploitation. There is substantial evidence to establish 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), and 7(b), based on these relationships, thereby 
shifting the burden of proof to Applicant to demonstrate mitigation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
The three with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not provide mitigation under the facts in this case. 
Applicant’s wife, parents, four brothers, sister, and parents-in-law are citizens of 
Afghanistan, where a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, manipulation, or coercion 
exists. Two of his brothers work in sensitive positions at high levels of the Afghan 
government. His wife and children are U.S permanent residents or citizens, but have 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
spent most of the time since June 2015 accompanying Applicant in Afghanistan. He 
maintains regular relationships and communication with his family members, as is 
normal and expected of a person with his good character. He did not rebut the 
presumption that his contacts and relationships with his family members are neither 
casual nor infrequent.  
  
AG ¶ 8(b) has only minimal application to date. Applicant initially moved to the 
United States in March 2009, and has been a U.S. citizen for only three years. Most of 
that time he has spent working or visiting family in Afghanistan. Although Applicant’s 
service as a contract linguist in support of U.S. forces in Afghanistan has been highly 
commendable, the evidence does not yet clearly establish that Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest in protecting 
sensitive information or technology.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition supported by evidence in this case that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport. 
 
Applicant had an active Afghan passport, which he used for his lawful entry into 
the United States. That passport expired in June 2016. He obtained a U.S. passport in 
April 2014, and surrendered possession of his Afghan passport to his FSO in June 
2015. The evidence potentially raised the above disqualifying condition as of the time 
the SOR was issued, shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concern.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides a condition that could mitigate the foreign preference security 
concern in this case: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Applicant’s Afghan passport was surrendered to his FSO in June 2015, and 
expired in June 2016. It is now invalidated. Full mitigation of the Guideline C security 
concern was established under AG ¶ 11(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence weighs in 
Applicant’s favor. He is an intelligent and articulate person, who has chosen to obtain 
U.S. citizenship for himself, his wife, and his children. He continues to provide dedicated 
and valuable services as a linguist supporting U.S. forces operating in his native 
Afghanistan, despite the officially recognized serious threats toward him as a result of 
that service. His Afghan passport was recently invalidated through expiration. 
 
There are no allegations of any misconduct by Applicant. He does, however, 
continue to have close connections to Afghanistan through numerous family members 
who are citizens and residents there. He provided insufficient evidence that the resulting 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress is diminished at present; 
particularly in light of the demonstrated heightened risk from the serious personal 
threats he experienced.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all pertinent facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B. Overall, the record evidence 
generates significant doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
  
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:       Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
David M. White 
Administrative Judge 
