KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board has no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-01807.a1
DATE: 04/19/2017
DATE: April 19, 2017
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01807
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 26, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On January 25, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric H. Borgstrom denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Forty six years old, Applicant has worked for her current employer, a DoD contractor, since
2014.  She is divorced and has experienced periods of unemployment.  The SOR alleges 13 debts
totaling about $83,000, including a past-due mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a).  She provided proof of consistent
payments for over a year on the mortgage, plus proof of other large payments.  She established that
a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.d) was not her responsibility.  She referenced a pending court hearing
on a judgment against her for about $28,000 (SOR ¶ 1.m) and a monthly payment agreement, but
provided no documentation of a payment history or remaining balance.  She provided no evidence
of payments or other steps taken to resolve the remaining ten debts.  She claimed two of those debts
were duplicates; however, credit reports, beyond balances, do not link the two accounts.       
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found for Applicant on the mortgage debt and the debt that was not her
responsibility.  He found against her on the remaining debts. Her divorce and periods of
unemployment were circumstances beyond her control, but there is no evidence of debt repayment
beyond her mortgage.  She provided insufficient evidence of a reasonable plan for debt repayment
or to establish her financial problems are being resolved.  
Discussion
Much of Applicant’s appeal presentation consists of matters from outside the record.  For
example, she provided documents showing payments towards debts.  However, we cannot consider
new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant argues that mitigating condition 20(a)1 applies to the mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.
1 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(a) states, “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s current liability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment[.]” 
2
Since the Judge found in favor of her on the mortgage debt, we need not address her argument
regarding that debt.
Item 4 of Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) is the summary of
Applicant’s personal subject interview (PSI)  with an Office of Personnel Management investigator. 
The Judge admitted Item 4 into evidence.  Applicant’s Appeal Brief states:
In regards to FORM Item 4, there were many responses that I indicated were
incorrectly reflected.  The information contained in the FORM from the investigation
contained numerous facts that were incorrect and not as reported.
The Appeal Brief does not identify the information that she claims is incorrect.  It is noted that 
Applicant was provided a copy of the FORM and advised of her opportunity to submit objections
or material that she wanted the Judge to consider.2  She submitted a response to the FORM in which
she neither objected to Item 4 nor indicated that it contained any information that was incorrect.3 
In the absence of any objection to Item 4 or indication that it contained inaccurate information, the
Judge did not err by admitting and considering that document.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06781
at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016).      
In the Appeal Brief, Applicant discusses, among other matters, the circumstances under
which her debts arose and her efforts to resolve them.  These assertions are neither enough to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor sufficient to show
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-04856 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017). 
Applicant requests that we postpone our decision for a short period to allow her the
opportunity to take corrective steps to prove she is worthy of a security clearance.  We have no
authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
04289 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).  She also points out that her job is important to her and her
family, implying that she may lose her job.  The Directive does not permit us to consider the adverse
consequences of an unfavorable decision.  Id. 
 
Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  The
Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision. 
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
2 A footnote in the FORM advised Applicant that she could object to Item 4 on the ground that it is
unauthenticated by a Government witness and may not be considered as evidence.  She was also advised that, if she
failed to raise an objection to Item 4, the Judge may determine she waived any objection to its admissibility and consider
it. 
3  From the record, the Appeal Board is unable to discern what information in Item 4 is incorrect.
3
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
