 
 1 
 
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 (Redacted) . )  ISCR Case No. 15-07433 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett C. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant tested positive for cocaine in September 2014 after using the drug while he 
possessed a Department of Defense secret clearance. In November 2011, he pleaded guilty to 
misdemeanor sexual assault of a minor in July 2009. He served 18 months of probation for the 
offense. His drug abuse is mitigated by the passage of time without recurrence, but concerns persist 
about his personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and explaining why it was 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865 (EO), 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 13, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. Counsel for 
Applicant forwarded the response to DOHA on May 27, 2016. On August 19, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
 
 2 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On August 22, 2016, I scheduled a 
hearing for September 27, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Four Government exhibits (GEs 1-4) and five 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-F) were admitted into evidence without objection. A copy of the letter 
forwarding discovery of the Government exhibits to Applicant’s counsel on August 10, 2016, was 
marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the record but was not entered as an evidentiary exhibit. 
Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 6, 2016. 
 
I held the record open after the hearing for Applicant to submit a copy of his discharge 
certificate from active duty (DD Form 214). Applicant forwarded a copy of his DD 214 by electronic 
mail on September 27, 2016. On October 3, 2016, Department Counsel indicated that the 
Government had no objection. The document was accepted into the record as AE F. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations and Response 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) and cross-alleges under 
Guideline E (SOR ¶ 2.a) that Applicant tested positive for cocaine on a September 2014 drug 
analysis while he was in the U.S. military and that his illegal drug use occurred after he had been 
granted a DOD secret clearance. Additionally, under Guideline E, Applicant was allegedly arrested 
in April 2010 for felony risk of injury and misdemeanor sexual assault but found guilty of illegal 
contact with a victim under age 16 (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed response to the SOR in which he admitted that he had used 
cocaine one time in September 2014 and that several days later, he was given a random urinalysis 
that returned with a positive result. He denied any other use of an illegal drug and explained that he 
was allowed to serve the remainder of his enlistment term. Applicant admitted that he had been 
charged with risk of injury and that he pleaded guilty to illegal contact with a victim under age 16. He 
indicated that a group of girls came aboard ship after a party and that one of the girls came into his 
bed while he was asleep and began touching him. He explained that he did not know the girl, did not 
ask her to come into his room, and did not know that she was underage. He asserted that he later 
came to learn that the same girl had engaged in sexual contact with two of his roommates. While he 
admitted that he had pleaded guilty to illegal contact with a victim under age 16, he did so to avoid 
going to trial. He maintained that he learned from his mistake and would never put himself in a 
similar position again. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old high school graduate with two years of training in the military. (GE 
1; Tr. 24.) He has been employed as a quality assurance engineer with a defense contractor since 
March 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from August 2005 to November 2014, 
when he was granted an honorable discharge at an E-5 pay grade.1 (AEs A, F.) He holds a DOD 
secret clearance that was granted to him in 2005 when he was in the military. (GE 1; Tr. 21, 41.) 
 
                                                          
1 When asked to provide his most recent rank, Applicant indicated on his security clearance application that he 
was a petty officer, first class (E-6). (GE 1.) His DD Form 214 indicates a pay grade of E-5 effective October 
15, 2014 (AE F), which is consistent with evidence of the October 2014 non-judicial punishment award of a 
reduction in rate. 
 
 3 
 On July 4, 2009, Applicant was involved in an incident with an underage female that led to 
him being arrested on April 12, 2010, for risk of injury, a class C felony. On November 8, 2011, 
Applicant was convicted of a substituted charge of misdemeanor sexual assault and sentenced to 
one year in jail, suspended, and 18 months of probation. He was exempted from having to file as a 
sex offender in the state’s registry. (GE 3.) Applicant went before an administrative board. (Tr. 31.) 
He was retained in the military, and he apparently completed his probation without incident. (AE F.) 
 
In September 2014, Applicant used cocaine with a woman whom he reportedly approached 
at a downtown bar. (Tr. 42.) He went back to her apartment and used cocaine with her, knowing that 
illegal drug use was in violation of his secret security clearance and in violation of the military’s zero 
tolerance policy. (Tr. 25-26, 42.) Applicant had been drinking that night, but indicates that he “was 
not overly intoxicated.” Two or three days later, his command ordered him to submit to a random 
drug screen, which tested positive for cocaine. (GE 4; Tr. 44.) As a result of the positive drug 
screen, Applicant received non-judicial punishment. He was reduced in rate, placed on restriction for 
45 days, and ordered to forfeit half of his pay for two months. (GEs 1, 2, 4; Tr. 44.) An initial incident 
report filed with DOHA on October 21, 2014, indicates that Applicant would be separated from the 
military with an Other than Honorable discharge. (GE 4.) Applicant was allowed to complete the 
remainder of his enlistment. As shown on his DD Form 214, Applicant was discharged on November 
30, 2014, at the rate of E-5 with the character of his service designated as “Honorable.” (AE F.) 
Applicant had earned his second Achievement Medal, a third Good Conduct Award, and several 
other medals for service in the war on terrorism. (AEs E, F.)  
 
Applicant was unemployed following his discharge from active duty. As of mid-January 2015, 
Applicant had accepted a job offer from his present employer. Needing classified access at the 
secret level, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) on January 19, 2015. In response to the police record inquiries, Applicant 
indicated that he pleaded guilty in November 2011 to sexual assault in the 4th degree, a 
misdemeanor, and that he was placed on 18 months of probation from approximately November 
2011 to May 2013. Applicant also responded affirmatively to an inquiry concerning whether he had 
illegally used a drug or controlled substance in the last seven years. He indicated that he snorted 
cocaine a few times one night in September 2014 while at a party. He added that it was “the first and 
only time” that he had used the drug, and he did not intend to use it in the future because of the 
negative affect it has on his body and because it has no place in his work or social life. Applicant 
answered “Yes” to an inquiry concerning any treatment for the use of drugs, and explained that as 
part of his non-judicial proceeding for violating the military’s drug policy, he saw a drug prevention 
counselor, who determined that he did not need further treatment. Concerning his clearance 
eligibility, he indicated that his secret clearance was suspended locally by his command as a result 
of his non-judicial punishment. (GE 1.) Applicant began working for his employer on March 25, 2015. 
(AE A.) He took a hair follicle test for his employment, which was negative for illegal drugs. (Tr. 40-
41.) 
 
On April 2, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM). Concerning his cocaine use in September 2014, Applicant indicated 
that he was on leave and at a party with a woman and her friends while they were using cocaine on 
a Thursday evening, and he decided to try the drug. The following Monday, he took a random 
urinalysis, which he did not pass. Two weeks later, he went to a non-judicial punishment proceeding. 
Because of the length of his service, he was scheduled to be discharged in November 2014. This 
being the only instance of illegal drug use, he was given an honorable discharge. Applicant denied 
any ongoing association with the woman or her friends involved in his cocaine use. Concerning the 
criminal charge on his record, Applicant indicated that in July 2009, he was at a party in town with 
other military personnel, including service members X and Y. He explained that he was sleeping 
 
 4 
when, around 2:00 a.m., service member X had sexual intercourse with a woman, whom he did not 
know and would not recognize. Two to three weeks later, Applicant went on deployment with the 
military personnel who had been at the party. On their return several months later, Applicant and the 
others were questioned by the police and informed that several people at the party had been 
underage, and that the woman with whom service member X had relations was under age 16. Then, 
in mid-2010, Applicant learned that there was a warrant for his arrest. Applicant indicated that his 
original sentence had been one year, suspended, with 18 months of probation with the military. He 
stated that the initial charge was possibly risk of injury to a minor, but it was downgraded to sexual 
assault in the fourth degree. He claimed he was found guilty by association and because he had 
knowledge of the incident and had done nothing to stop it from occurring. Applicant denied any 
personal participation in criminal activity. (GE 2.) 
 
Around September 2015, Applicant began dating his present girlfriend. In approximately May 
2016, they began a cohabitant romantic relationship. (Tr. 32, 50.) Applicant owns his home, which 
he purchased in December 2015. His annual salary of $80,000 is sufficient to cover the mortgage 
payments. (Tr. 22-23.) 
 
On April 20, 2016, the DOD CAF issued an SOR to Applicant, citing security concerns about 
his illegal drug involvement and his personal conduct. On May 13, 2016, in response to the SOR, 
Applicant indicated that he had learned from his “mistake” using an illegal drug on a single, isolated 
occasion in September 2014 and that it would not happen again. About his conviction of sexual 
assault, Applicant indicated that he pleaded guilty to illegal contact with a victim under age 16 and 
that he did not recall a charge of sexual assault. He stated that the incident occurred when a group 
of girls came aboard ship after a party, and one of the girls came into his bed when he was asleep 
and began touching him. He indicated that he would never put himself in a position to allow a similar 
incident in the future. (Answer.) 
 
On June 2, 2016, Applicant executed a statement of intent to never use or possess an illegal 
drug in the future or to associate with anyone who uses illegal drug with automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any violation. (AE B.) Applicant voluntarily took three drug screens between 
August 25, 2016, and September 15, 2016. The results were negative for all drugs tested, including 
cocaine metabolites. (AE C.) On September 8, 2016, Applicant underwent a drug and alcohol 
evaluation with a licensed alcohol and drug counselor (LADC). Applicant asserted that he had used 
cocaine only once. Objective testing and his clinical interview showed that he had a low probability 
of a substance use disorder and that he experiences remorse over his use of the drug. (AE D.) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified about his cocaine use in September 2014 that he met a girl 
downtown, apparently at a bar, and that he had been drinking but was “not overly intoxicated.” He 
claimed that he was alone with the woman in her apartment when they used cocaine together. He 
did not pay for the cocaine. (Tr. 42-44.) He was not pressured to use cocaine. (Tr. 52.) He admitted 
that he had not disclosed his cocaine use to his superiors before his random drug screen that led to 
his non-judicial punishment. (Tr. 44.) 
 
Concerning his involvement with a female under age 16, Applicant testified that he pleaded 
guilty to illegal contact with a victim under the age of 16, a misdemeanor. He related that three girls 
had been at a party at his house, even though neither he nor his roommates knew them. One of the 
girls, who had already had sexual intercourse with one of his two roommates with his knowledge, 
then came up to his bedroom where he was sleeping. She got in bed with him and touched him in a 
sexual way. He woke up, saw what was going on, “maybe a minute, and she left.” He did not touch 
her, but he also did not stop her. It did not dawn on him that she was underage. (Tr. 46-47.) 
Applicant indicated that on his return from a six-month deployment, he learned that the girl was 
 
 5 
under age 16. (Tr. 29-30.) Applicant denied any contact with any of the three girls since then. 
Applicant testified that he has definitely become more responsible since then, citing his 
homeownership and involvement in a committed relationship. He believes he has “become more 
wise because of some of the things that have happened to [him] in the past.” (Tr. 32-33.) When 
asked to explain his guilty plea to sexual assault in the 4th degree as reported by an FBI record, 
Applicant testified that he pleaded guilty to illegal contact with a person under age 16. (Tr. 48-49.) 
He claimed he was advised to plead guilty by his lawyer to prevent going to trial and risk possible jail 
time. (Tr. 51.) Applicant admitted that he had to report to a probation officer monthly. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 6 
Character References 
 
 Several co-workers familiar with Applicant’s work performance with his present employer 
provided reference letters endorsing Applicant for security clearance eligibility. Applicant has earned 
the respect of co-workers for his knowledge, eagerness to learn, and his ability to take on new 
challenges. Applicant’s department manager described Applicant as “a hardworking, enthusiastic 
contributor to the group and department.” Applicant has been very courteous, honest, and 
dependable. (AE A p. 1.)  Applicant’s current supervisor (AE A p. 6) and the safety program director 
(AE A p. 2) indicated that Applicant had a detailed understanding and was instrumental in the 
success of rigorous audits. Applicant handles issues professionally and interacts well with their 
military customer. A nuclear operations supervisor, who was stationed with Applicant in the military 
and is Applicant’s best friend (Tr. 35), attested to Applicant being the “go to guy” in quality 
assurance and mechanical knowledge. He described Applicant’s living habits as “clean, well-
organized, and fiscally responsible.” (AE A p. 4.) Another close friend who previously served with 
Applicant in the same command obtained his job with the defense contractor on Applicant’s referral. 
He retired from the military after 24 years. (Tr. 35.) From his experience of Applicant in the military 
and now in the same department, he does not have any concerns about Applicant’s integrity or 
honesty. (AE A p. 5.) Applicant testified that both of these co-workers are aware of the 2009 
allegations involving the underage girl (Tr. 35), although neither make any mention of the incident or 
of Applicant’s cocaine use in violation of military policy. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive Branch has 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When 
evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires 
that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions 
that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security 
decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
 
 7 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 
7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern about drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),2 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in 
a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” The evidence establishes disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” AG ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use,” AG 25(c), 
“illegal drug possession,” and AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” Applicant used cocaine with a woman he just met in September 2014. He had physical 
possession of the drug while using it. While he may have been on leave at the time, he knew that 
illegal drug possession and use was prohibited by active duty military and DOD clearance holders 
and a violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Applicant’s drug use was detected by a 
random drug screen and not disclosed voluntarily by him. His illegal drug involvement raises 
significant security concerns. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies. There is no evidence of 
any illegal drug use by Applicant beyond the single occasion in September 2014, so his cocaine use 
was infrequent. 
 
Applicant denies any use of an illegal drug other than the use of cocaine on one occasion in 
September 2014 and any intention to use cocaine or any other illegal drug in the future.  Under 
                                                          
2Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Cocaine is a Schedule II controlled substance. 
 
 
 8 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future” may be 
shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(b)(1), Applicant’s uncontroverted testimony is that he does not 
associate with anyone who currently uses illegal drugs. Applicant maintains, with no evidence to the 
contrary, that he did not previously know the woman involved in his cocaine use before he met her 
at a bar that day. He testified that they went together to her apartment, and that they were alone 
when they used cocaine. Applicant discrepantly indicated to an OPM investigator in April 2015 that 
he was at a party with a woman and with her friends, who he did not know beforehand, and that he 
obtained the cocaine from the woman’s friends. While the discrepancy about the circumstances of 
his drug involvement has implications for his credibility, his circumstances have changed since his 
illegal drug involvement. Applicant is now a homeowner and in a committed personal relationship. 
There is no evidence that he continues to associate with any known illegal drug users or that he 
frequents places conducive to illegal drug involvement. AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and AG ¶ 26(b)(2) apply.  
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(b)(3), Applicant had abstained for little more than three months as of his 
completion of his SF 86. By the time of his hearing in late September 2016, he had abstained for two 
years, which, when considering the limited extent of his cocaine use, is “an appropriate period of 
abstinence” for a showing that he can be counted on to abide by a drug-free lifestyle. Applicant 
executed the statement of intent to abstain with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, 
so AG ¶ 26(b)(4) is also established. An LADC evaluated Applicant and found no clinical indication 
of substance abuse. Applicant regrets his cocaine abuse, and he is not likely to jeopardize his 
employment by abusing any drug in the future. The drug involvement security concerns are 
sufficiently mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
 Concerning the Government’s case for disqualification under the personal conduct guideline 
because of Applicant’s cocaine use and the fact that he used the drug while holding a clearance 
(SOR 2.a), the DOHA Appeal Board has held that security-related conduct can be alleged under 
more than one guideline, and in an appropriate case, be given independent weight under each. See 
ISCR 11-06672 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012). Separate from the risk of physiological impairment 
associated with the use of mood-altering substances, which is a Guideline H concern, Applicant had 
an obligation as a clearance holder to comply with DOD policy, including the prohibitions against 
drug involvement. Applicant used cocaine in September 2014, knowing that it was prohibited by the 
military and in violation of his clearance obligations. His drug use was detected in a random drug 
 
 9 
screen, and it led to the imposition of non-judicial punishment in October 2014. Although his use of 
cocaine may not now warrant disqualification under Guideline H, his use after being granted security 
clearance eligibility is an aggravating factor that raises separate concerns about his judgment. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant exercised very poor judgment in July 2009 in the incident involving 
sexual contact with an underage girl. He now submits that he pleaded guilty to illegal contact with a 
victim under age 16, but he told an OPM investigator in April 2015 that he was convicted of sexual 
assault in the 4 h degree. The court records are not before me for review. However, the FBI reports 
that he was placed on 18 months of probation on a substituted charge of sexual assault in the 4 th 
degree, a class A misdemeanor violation under state law § 53A-73A(A)(2).3 Applicant provided 
discrepant accounts about his culpability. Applicant told the OPM investigator that he was guilty by 
association and by having knowledge of the incident, which involved a party at an unknown address 
where another service member had sexual relations with a female under age 16 when Applicant was 
sleeping. When he answered the SOR, Applicant indicated that three young women had come 
aboard ship and one of them had entered his bed and touched him. He testified at his hearing that 
he and his roommates had a party at their residence, and that he awoke to find a female in his bed 
touching him in a sexual manner, but he did not reciprocate. He claimed he pleaded guilty on the 
advice of his lawyer to avoid possibly serving jail time, but it is difficult to find that he was himself a 
                                                          
3 The pertinent state statute under which Applicant was convicted provides as follows: 
 
(a) A person is guilty of sexual assault in the fourth degree when: (1) Such person 
intentionally subjects another person to sexual contact who is (A) under thirteen years of age 
and the actor is more than two years older than such other person, or (B) thirteen years of 
age or older but under fifteen years of age and the actor is more than three years older than 
such other person, or (C) mentally defective or mentally incapacitated to the extent that such 
other person is unable to consent to such sexual contact, or (D) physically helpless, or (E) 
less than eighteen years old and the actor is such other person's guardian or otherwise 
responsible for the general supervision of such other person's welfare, or (F) in custody of 
law or detained in a hospital or other institution and the actor has supervisory or disciplinary 
authority over such other person; or (2) such person subjects another person to sexual 
contact without such other person's consent; or (3) such person engages in sexual contact 
with an animal or dead body; or (4) such person is a psychotherapist and subjects another 
person to sexual contact who is (A) a patient of the actor and the sexual contact occurs 
during the psychotherapy session, or (B) a patient or former patient of the actor and such 
patient or former patient is emotionally dependent upon the actor, or (C) a patient or former 
patient of the actor and the sexual contact occurs by means of therapeutic deception; or (5) 
such person subjects another person to sexual contact and accomplishes the sexual contact 
by means of false representation that the sexual contact is for a bona fide medical purpose 
by a health care professional; or (6) such person is a school employee and subjects another 
person to sexual contact who is a student enrolled in a school in which the actor works or a 
school under the jurisdiction of the local or regional board of education which employs the 
actor; or (7) such person is a coach in an athletic activity or a person who provides intensive, 
ongoing instruction and subjects another person to sexual contact who is a recipient of 
coaching or instruction from the actor and (A) is a secondary school student and receives 
such coaching or instruction in a secondary school setting, or (B) is under eighteen years of 
age; or (8) such person subjects another person to sexual contact and (A) the actor is twenty 
years of age or older and stands in a position of power, authority or supervision over such 
other person by virtue of the actor's professional, legal, occupational or volunteer status and 
such other person's participation in a program or activity, and (B) such other person is under 
eighteen years of age. 
 
(b) Sexual assault in the fourth degree is a class A misdemeanor or, if the victim of the 
offense is under sixteen years of age, a class D felony. 
 
 10 
victim and without some culpability in either intentionally having sexual contact with an underage 
female or in allowing sexual contact initiated by her to continue. Perhaps because the conduct 
occurred in 2009, the DOD CAF did not cite criminal conduct concerns. It is another indication of 
poor judgment, which along with his use of cocaine while in the military with a secret clearance, 
triggers AG ¶ 16(c), which provides: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant submits in mitigation that the circumstances that led to his drug use and to his 
conviction for sexual assault are not likely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) provides for mitigation when “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” While the personal conduct concerns were 
infrequent, they were not minor and did not occur under circumstances that could reasonably be 
characterized as unique. Applicant told an OPM investigator that he used the cocaine with a woman 
and her friends at a party, but he now claims he was alone with the woman in her apartment. As for 
the incident involving the underage female, Applicant indicated in April 2015 that he was guilty by 
association in another service member’s misconduct in having sexual relations with an underage 
female while he was sleeping. Yet, when he answered the SOR, he claimed three young women 
boarded his ship, and one entered his bed while he was sleeping. He now admits the incident 
occurred after a party that he and his housemates had in their home. 
 
 Applicant expressed regret about his drug use and his “mistake” in the incident involving the 
sexual assault. However, Applicant’s discrepant accounts of the circumstances of his cocaine abuse 
and of his sexual assault undermine his case for mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d), which provides: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change 
the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, 
or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and 
such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Moreover, when asked why he used cocaine in knowing violation of the DOD’s zero 
tolerance policy, he responded, “It was a poor decision on my part. And it was towards the end of my 
Navy career and it was just one night on one circumstance that it happened.” (Tr. 26.) To the extent 
that he minimizes or justifies his deliberate disregard of DOD policy and the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, he has not shown that he can be counted on to comply with security requirements without 
regard to his personal interests. Although he completed his probation for the sexual assault without 
incident, I have persistent concerns about his candor with respect to what transpired that night. The 
personal conduct concerns are not adequately mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 
 11 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and all relevant 
circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4 
 
Youth was a factor in the 2009 sexual assault. He was 22 at the time, and there is no 
indication that he knew or should have known that the girls were underage. However, he was 27, 
had been in the military for nine years, and was serving at the rate of E-6 when he possessed and 
used cocaine while holding a security clearance. He has exhibited some maturity and stability by 
buying a home, becoming involved in a committed, cohabitant relationship, and performing work of 
value to his employer. His work and character references are uniformly positive.  
 
 Even so, Applicant placed his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in doubt by being less 
than fully forthcoming at times about the issues of security concern. It is well settled that once a 
security concern arises, there is a strong presumption against the grant or continuation of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 
(1991). For the reasons discussed, I am not able to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required 
by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
                                                          
4The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 12 
Administrative Judge 
 
