 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 (Redacted) )  ISCR Case No. 15-07454 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett C. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from May 2001 to June 2006. His 
use diminished after college to less than twice a year. He has not used any marijuana 
since January 2015 and does not intend to use any illegal drug in the future. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On May 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing a security 
concern under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and explaining why it was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him security clearance eligibility. 
The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 15, 2016, and he requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. On 
August 19, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. On August 22, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for September 26, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and 14 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-N) were admitted into evidence without objection. A letter 
forwarding discovery of the Government’s potential exhibits to the Applicant on August 10, 
2016, was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the record but was not admitted as an 
evidentiary exhibit. Applicant, his cohabitant girlfriend, and his mother testified, as reflected 
in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 5, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from May 
2001 to January 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant submitted a detailed response (Answer) in 
which he detailed the frequency of his marijuana use and denied any intention of future 
illegal drug involvement. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old electrical engineer, who has worked since June 2015 for a 
nonprofit company that operates federally-funded research and development centers. (GE 
1; Tr. 45-46.) Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science, magna cum laude, in 
mathematics in August 2006, and a master of science in electrical engineering with a high 
grade point average in August 2016. (AE B.) He seeks his first DOD security clearance. 
(GE 1.) 
 
At the end of his junior year in high school in May 2001, Applicant began using 
marijuana. He used the drug with a hometown friend (friend X) once or twice a month, 
except during track and cross-country seasons, when he abstained. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 49-50.) 
His friend provided the marijuana at no cost to him. (Tr. 49.) Applicant knew that his state 
has not legalized the recreational use of marijuana. (Tr. 68.) 
 
In August 2002, Applicant began attending his state university. He used marijuana 
approximately once a month, except when he competed in track for the university. In 
December 2003, he ceased his involvement in college sports. He used marijuana less than 
once a month with one of two friends at school, including friend Y, or with friend X during 
school breaks. (Tr. 50-53.) Applicant finished his classwork in June 2006, but he was not 
awarded his bachelor’s degree until August 2006 because he missed a deadline for 
submission of some paperwork. (GEs 1, 2; Answer.) 
 
In October 2006, Applicant moved away from his hometown for a job as a fund 
accountant with a bank. (GE 1.) He did not use marijuana in his new area because he did 
not know anyone who had access to the drug. (Tr. 54.) Applicant did not find his position 
intellectually stimulating, so he decided to pursue a career in actuarial science. (Tr. 17.) He 
 
 3 
passed an actuarial exam and applied for several entry-level positions in the field. When he 
received no responses, he left his job at the bank and took a position as a research 
assistant with his mother’s employer, a state-operated research hospital, in June 2007. 
(GE 1; Tr. 17-18.) Friend Y was a graduate student at the university. Applicant used 
marijuana thereafter with friend Y a couple times a year, usually in friend Y’s apartment. He 
also used marijuana with a roommate in 2009 and one time in 2011 with a friend after 
playing Ultimate Frisbee. (Tr. 55-56.) After 2011, Applicant used marijuana four times. He 
used it once each in July 2012 and July 2013. (Answer.) In July or August 2013, Applicant 
began dating his girlfriend, who does not approve of illegal drugs. (AE I; Tr. 23, 72-74.) 
 
Applicant proved to be a talented researcher with outstanding qualitative and 
practical skills. (AEs J, K.) His supervisors trusted him, and he gained respect in his 
department. (AE N.) In approximately April 2014, Applicant learned that he was going to be 
laid off from his job because of a loss of federal funding. Shortly thereafter, Applicant was 
visiting friend Y, who had recently lost his father. At friend Y’s request, they smoked 
marijuana together. Applicant felt pressured to use marijuana because of the 
circumstances, although he claims that he “tried to avoid significant intoxication.” (Tr. 23, 
58.) Applicant informed his girlfriend about his marijuana use with friend Y and also that he 
had used marijuana “maybe a couple of times a year” in the past. (Tr. 76.) She was upset 
and expressed her displeasure at what she considered to be immature and illegal behavior. 
She also advised him that drug use was against her beliefs and her future goal of starting a 
family. (Tr. 72-74.) He promised her that he would not use marijuana again. (Tr. 77.) In 
May 2014, Applicant and his girlfriend began a cohabitant relationship. (AE I; Tr. 73.) He 
avoided socializing with friend Y because he no longer felt comfortable maintaining their 
friendship. (Answer; Tr. 24.) 
 
 In August 2014, Applicant began his graduate studies. He decided to quit using 
marijuana because he wanted to “turn a new page in life” and get more serious about his 
life, education, and career. In November 2014, Applicant saw friend Y at the wedding for a 
mutual friend. (Answer.) There is no evidence that marijuana was present on that occasion. 
 
 In January 2015, Applicant used marijuana while on a ski trip to Colorado with two 
friends, both licensed medical professionals. (GEs 1, 2; Answer; Tr. 24-25.) One of these 
friends, who had never used marijuana because of its illegality, proposed that they use 
some marijuana because it was legal in the state. Applicant knew that marijuana use was 
illegal under federal law, but it was also his understanding that states could regulate 
marijuana within their own borders. He and his friends were confused about state 
legalizations, in part because the federal government had not legally challenged state 
actions to legalize or decriminalize recreational use, and they thought it was legal to use 
marijuana in Colorado under a similar regime to legal alcohol. (Tr. 25, 61-62.) He did not 
believe his girlfriend would be upset with him because it was legal where he used it. He 
and his friends bought the marijuana from a local shop. (Tr. 62.) Applicant informed his 
girlfriend about his marijuana use in Colorado on his return from the ski trip. She was very 
upset and extremely disappointed in him. (AE I; Tr. 72.) They had a long discussion about 
his drug use, and he promised that he could not use marijuana again. (AE I.) Applicant 
 
 4 
regrets his use of marijuana in January 2015, which he considers a “lapse of judgment.” 
(Answer.) He has not used marijuana since then and intends no future use. (Tr. 63.) 
 
  After his ski trip, Applicant resumed his graduate studies and began working part 
time as a teaching assistant grading papers. (GE 1; Tr. 25.) The work did not pay well, and 
he had to use savings to cover his living expenses. (Tr. 25.) Applicant’s brother, who works 
for Applicant’s employer, encouraged Applicant to apply for employment with the company. 
Applicant knew that the job required a security clearance, but he did not realize that his 
past use of marijuana would be a problem for security clearance eligibility. A friend, who 
had stopped using marijuana in 2010, had obtained a security clearance and told him that 
he would be fine provided he was honest about his drug use. (Tr. 26.) In April 2015, 
Applicant accepted an offer of employment. (GE 2.) 
 
 In April 2015, Applicant saw friend Y at a birthday party for a mutual friend. Friend Y 
offered Applicant some marijuana. Applicant declined and told friend Y that he had 
obtained a job with his current employer and would not be using marijuana again. Applicant 
testified that friend Y accepted his explanation. (Tr. 24.)  
 
 On May 3, 2015, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). Applicant responded affirmatively to 
an inquiry concerning any illegal use of a drug or controlled substance in the last seven 
years. He disclosed that he used marijuana between May 2001 and January 2015, on 
average once month in high school and college and on average less than twice a year 
thereafter. He indicated that his most recent use was in Colorado where it is legal. 
Applicant denied any intention to use marijuana in the future, stating: 
 
I do not intend to use this drug per the conditions of the security clearance I 
am applying for. I do not believe I will have any temptation to use this drug in 
the future because I find the drug only mildly enjoyable, and definitely not 
enjoyable enough to risk my career or the security of the United States. (GE 
1.) 
 
 In early June 2015, Applicant started his current employment. He is aware that his 
employer has a zero-tolerance policy with respect to drug abuse. (Tr. 47-48.) Applicant 
moved for his job, but he and his girlfriend continued to live together on the weekends. He 
continued to pursue his graduate degree, commuting approximately 66 miles one way for 
his remaining classes. (GE 2.) 
 
 On August 7, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant indicated that he began using 
marijuana in high school because of peer pressure and that he continued to use the drug 
through college. He reported using the drug until January 2015 because he did not have an 
incentive to stop, but that in January 2015, he realized that he would have to leave 
marijuana behind if he was to achieve his employment goals. He used marijuana at parties 
when the drug was provided and available. Applicant did not provide the names of the 
persons involved in his marijuana use or the locations of his use apart from that his last 
 
 5 
use was in Colorado, where it is legal. Applicant reported that he had no intention of any 
future marijuana use and that he no longer associated with anyone who uses marijuana. 
(GE 2.) 
 
 On August 30, 2016, Applicant was evaluated by his physician. He exhibited no 
signs or symptoms of cannabis use disorder or any clinical indications that would warrant 
substance abuse treatment. (AE L.) A urinalysis submitted on August 18, 2016, was 
negative for all substances tested, including THC. (AE M.) On September 25, 2016, 
Applicant executed, in the presence of his girlfriend, a declaration of intention “to never 
consume, possess, purchase or sell marijuana or any other illegal drugs again, with 
automatic revocation of any security clearance [he holds] for any violation.” (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother first learned that Applicant had used marijuana in the past when 
it became an issue for his security clearance. She was disappointed to learn that he had 
used marijuana, but she believes Applicant has not used the drug since January 2015. He 
expressed his embarrassment and regret for his immature behavior and his intention to 
refrain from marijuana in the future. (AE N; Tr. 85-89.) Applicant’s mother has observed 
Applicant’s girlfriend to be a good influence on her son. (AE N.) 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend, who works as an emergency medical technician (Tr. 29), has 
not known Applicant to use any marijuana since January 2015. (Tr. 75.) She has made it 
known to him that she does not tolerate any illegal drug use and that she views smoking 
marijuana as irresponsible behavior. (AE I; Tr. 72-75.) Applicant and his girlfriend’s mutual 
friends do not use any illegal drugs. (Tr. 81.) 
 
 Applicant lost touch with friend X in 2008 or 2009. (Tr. 22, 52.) He has not seen 
friend Y since April 2015. (Tr. 24, 64.) Applicant still associates with the two friends with 
whom he went skiing in January 2015. (Tr. 62, 66.) Applicant last saw them in September 
2015. (Tr. 69.) He informed both of them that he had stopped using marijuana because it 
was illegal under federal law and contrary to the requirements for security clearance 
eligibility. According to Applicant, his friends were supportive of his decision. (Tr. 25.) 
Applicant believes that neither of these friends uses illegal drugs, given that they would 
lose their medical licenses for illegal drug involvement. (Tr. 69.) They realize that their use 
of marijuana in Colorado was inappropriate, immature, and illegal under federal law. (Tr. 
68-69.) 
 
 Applicant does not have a record of irresponsible behavior in other aspects of his 
life. He has a very good credit score (AE D) and an excellent work record. He is endorsed 
for security clearance eligibility by his direct supervisor (AE G) and by a lead engineer on 
his team (AE E). Applicant’s supervisor, who is a department manager and project leader, 
has no hesitation recommending Applicant for a security clearance. After working closely 
with Applicant on several modeling efforts for an outside customer, he has found it 
“abundantly clear” that Applicant possesses the judgment to protect the company’s 
intellectual property as well as their client’s interests. (AE G.) The lead engineer is unaware 
of the particular concerns of the DOD, but he knows that an SOR was issued to Applicant. 
Applicant quickly grasped new concepts and made solid contributions despite his work 
 
 6 
being limited to unclassified matters. He has seen no reason to question Applicant’s 
trustworthiness. (AE E.) In April 2016, Applicant was given an out-of-cycle wage increase 
because of his excellent work performance. (AE C.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother believes Applicant will be a responsible steward of the nation’s 
secrets. He has never known Applicant to have financial issues or to be other than reliable. 
While Applicant has made some choices in the past that may raise concerns about 
Applicant’s judgment, he believes that Applicant understands that seeking a security 
clearance has changed his circumstances and that Applicant can be counted on to make 
different decisions going forward. (AE F.) 
 
 A close friend of Applicant’s since college, who also works for Applicant’s employer, 
recently obtained a DOD secret clearance. He opined that Applicant possesses good 
character and is capable of handling the duties and responsibilities of a secret clearance. 
(AE H.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
 
 7 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),1 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant used marijuana 
between May 2001 and January 2015, on average once a month in high school and 
college and once or twice yearly more recently. Applicant used the drug when it was 
offered to him by others, and there is no evidence that his friends asked him to contribute 
to its cost. However, he purchased the drug in Colorado in January 2015, albeit from a 
legal source. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” has 
some applicability, but there is no evidence that he possessed marijuana other than when 
he used it. 
 
                                                 
1Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 
 8 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot 
reasonably apply. Applicant used marijuana only four times after 2011, but he used the 
drug approximately monthly in high school and college. When viewed as a whole, his 
marijuana involvement was not “so infrequent.” Moreover, his use of marijuana on the ski 
trip in January 2015 occurred within six months of his security clearance application. It was 
too recent to be mitigated because of the passage of time. 
 
Applicant denies that he used any marijuana after the ski trip in January 2015 and 
that he has any intention to use marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. Under 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future” may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(b)(1), Applicant’s uncontroverted testimony is that he does not 
associate with anyone who currently uses illegal drugs. He lost contact with high school 
friend X in 2008 or 2009. He has seen friend Y since they last used marijuana together in 
May 2014, but their contact has been limited to a friend’s wedding in November 2014 and a 
birthday party in April 2015. Friend Y was apparently still using marijuana because he 
offered some to Applicant at the birthday party, but Applicant declined the offer and 
informed friend Y that can no longer use marijuana. Applicant testified credibly that he no 
longer socializes with friend Y on an ongoing basis. There is no evidence that Applicant 
has had any contact since 2009 with his then roommate with whom he had also used 
marijuana or since 2011 with the person with whom he played Ultimate Frisbee. Applicant 
acknowledges that he continues to associate with the two friends with whom he used 
marijuana in Colorado in January 2015. However, to his knowledge, both friends do not 
currently use marijuana and do not intend to use the drug in the future. They have a 
significant motivation in remaining abstinent, given they could lose their medical licenses. 
AG ¶ 26(b)(1) applies in that Applicant is not acting to maintain relationships with known 
illegal drug users. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b)(2) is established in that Applicant is no longer in the school 
environments where most of his marijuana use occurred. Applicant has been in a 
cohabitant relationship with his girlfriend since May 2014, and she does not use illegal 
drugs. She has made clear to Applicant that she disapproves of his marijuana use and will 
not tolerate any illegal drug involvement in their home. Applicant’s girlfriend has reportedly 
had a positive influence on him. Even so, despite her expressed disapproval of his 
 
 9 
marijuana involvement in May 2014 and his promise to her that he would not use the drug 
again, Applicant was not dissuaded from using marijuana with his two friends in January 
2015. Applicant mistakenly believed that his girlfriend would not be upset with him because 
recreational marijuana was legal in the state. He learned otherwise when he returned and 
informed her about his marijuana use. His present home environment and his employment 
with a company with a zero tolerance for illegal drug use are seen as deterrents to any 
future illegal drug involvement by Applicant. 
 
 As for AG ¶ 26(b)(3), Applicant’s present abstinence of some 21 months as of his 
hearing in late September 2016 is comparatively brief in relation to the 14 years over which 
he used marijuana, even considering the decline in the frequency of his marijuana use to 
once or twice a year during the last five years. However, his efforts to avoid situations 
conducive to illegal drug use, his responsible financial behavior, and his commitment to his 
work, reflect increased maturity and soundness of judgment. Applicant has expressed 
regret about his past marijuana use, and he has executed the statement of intent required 
under AG ¶ 26(b)(4). Applicant understands that any future drug abuse would be 
incompatible with his security clearance obligations. His record of exemplary work 
performance does not alone mitigate his history of marijuana use, but he is not likely to 
jeopardize his job and career by using any illegal drug in the future. I am persuaded that 
Applicant can be counted on to abstain from any illegal drug involvement in the future. The 
drug involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).2 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in abusing marijuana. He knew it was illegal 
under federal law and also in his home state, where most of his use occurred. It is 
particularly troubling that he did not put his marijuana use behind him after college. 
Applicant’s self-report of his marijuana use weighs in his favor under the whole-person 
evaluation. His professionalism, dedication, and reliability at work have earned him the 
respect and trust of his co-workers, who have no hesitation in recommending him for 
security clearance eligibility. While his years of marijuana use are not condoned, it also 
appears that Applicant has put his drug use behind him. 
 
                                                 
2The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 10 
Once a security concern arises, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
continuation of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). At the same time, security clearance decisions 
are not intended as punishment for past wrongdoing, but rather involve an assessment of 
future risk that one may not properly handle or safeguard classified information. For the 
reasons discussed under Guideline H, supra, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
