 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00782 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 7, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 23, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The Government submitted 
documents identified as Items 1 through 8. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and he 
 
2 
 
 
received it on May 31, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded to the FORM 
on June 27, 2016. His submission is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and it is 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence. Items 1-3 are the pleadings in the case. Items 4 through 8 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with comments. I have 
incorporated his admissions and relevant comments into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. In March 2010, he retired from the U.S. Navy as an E-6 
after 20 years of honorable service. He held a confidential security clearance. Applicant 
was married from 1990-1995, and again from 2000 until April 2010. He has no children.1  
   
 After Applicant retired, his employment was sporadic He worked as a self-
employed home handyman from March to September 2010. He worked as a manager for 
a storage company from September 2010 to May 2011. After learning that the company 
was being sold, he became concerned for his job security. He voluntarily left the position 
to pursue an education. He worked as a handyman again from May 2011 to June 2012. 
He also took some college classes from September 2011 to May 2012. In June 2012, he 
began working as a site supervisor for his current employer, a defense contractor.2 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2012. He 
disclosed numerous delinquent accounts. He noted that when he retired from the military 
his income declined from $5,000 to $1,500 a month. This left him unable to pay his bills. 
He also noted that he and his wife divorced after he retired. He indicated he was pursuing 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.3   
 
The SOR alleges 25 delinquent accounts. It is based on credit reports from 
September 2012 and January 2015.4 One debt (SOR ¶1.a), is a mortgage foreclosure. 
Another debt (SOR ¶ 1.w) is a charged-off second mortgage, for $62,016. Many of the 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.q, 1.x and 1.y) are consumer accounts totaling about $72,145. The 
remaining accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.r – 1.v).are prior charge-offs alleged as remaining 
delinquent with no amount specified.  
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 4, 8.  
 
3 Items 4, 8.  
 
4  SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.j and 1.r-1.v are found on Item 6. SOR debts ¶¶ 1.k-1.q and 1.w-1.y are found on 
Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.l are debts to the same collection agency. They appear on 
separate credit reports. The accounts were both opened in April 2012, and have the same 
high credit limit figure, of $5,285. I find that they are duplicates and resolve SOR debt ¶1.l 
for Applicant.5  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.m are debts to the same collection agency. They appear on 
separate credit reports. The accounts were both opened in March 2011, and have the 
same high credit limit figure, of $3,127. I find that they are duplicates and resolve SOR 
debt ¶1.m for Applicant. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.u are debts to the same creditor bank. They appear on separate 
credit reports. The accounts were both opened in March 2011, and have the same high 
credit limit figure, of $8,717. I find that they are duplicates and resolve SOR debt ¶1.u for 
Applicant.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.o appear on separate credit reports, and name two different 
creditors. However, they have the same account numbers. I find that they are duplicates 
and resolve SOR debt ¶1.o for Applicant.  
 
The Government’s evidence also includes a credit report dated May 23, 2016, the 
same date as the FORM. It shows that SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.q, 
1.r, 1.s, 1.t and 1.y remain delinquent or charged off as of that date. SOR debt ¶ 1.i is 
shown as paid. That debt is resolved.6     
 
Applicant had two mortgages on the home he and his wife maintained when he 
was in the Navy. He stopped paying his two mortgages after he retired from the Navy in 
early 2010. His efforts to renegotiate his mortgages were unsuccessful. Applicant moved 
out of the home and relocated to another city. The home was foreclosed in approximately 
May 2011. Applicant’s 2012 credit report indicates that foreclosure was redeemed when 
the creditor reclaimed the collateral to settle the primary mortgage. The second mortgage 
was charged off in April 2011. Applicant’s credit reports from 2015 and 2016 show that 
both the primary mortgage and the second mortgage now have a zero balance. The most 
recent credit report, from May 2016, shows that the second mortgage is a paid charge 
off.7  In his Answer, Applicant states that the foreclosed mortgage (SOR ¶1.a) and the 
$10,554 consumer debt at SOR ¶ 1.b are both “closed out and on my taxes.” Applicant 
provides no documentation to show any efforts he made to renegotiate his mortgage or 
bring his payments current before he moved away. He states that the debts at SOR ¶ 1.i 
($646) and SOR ¶ 1.x ($99.00) have been paid. He provides no corroborating 
documentation for any of these debts.  
                                                          
5 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
6 Item 7.  
 
7  Items 5, 6, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provides a statement, but no supporting 
documentation. He indicates that he is discussing financial counseling and bankruptcy 
with legal counsel. He indicates that he made his first alimony payment on time, in May 
2016. He is current on his car payments and nearly finished with them. His credit score 
has improved. He lists 15 debts that he has paid since retiring from the Navy and 
beginning employment in the defense industry. These debts total about $44,155. He does 
not indicate that any of them are SOR debts, though two of them, one for $648 and one 
for $99, appear to be SOR debts ¶¶1.i and 1.x.8 Several of the accounts Applicant lists 
are not found on any of the credit reports in the record, and were not alleged in the SOR. 
Several others are listed on his credit reports as having been paid and closed before the 
SOR was issued.9 They, too, were not alleged. Applicant provides no documentation of 
any payments he has made towards his SOR debts. He provides no documentation to 
corroborate any of his statements that his finances have improved.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
8 AE A.  
 
9 Items 5, 6, 7. 
 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debt in 2010 after he retired from the 
Navy. Numerous accounts remain delinquent. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has had significant ongoing financial delinquencies since he retired from 
the Navy. He did not provide any documentary evidence of his efforts to pay or otherwise 
resolve them. He provided no documentary evidence of his current financial situation. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
His ongoing delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce and to a significant loss of 
income after his retirement from the Navy in 2010. Applicant experienced sporadic 
employment until beginning his current position in the defense industry in 2012. His 
employment issues were a circumstance beyond his control that impacted his ability to 
maintain financial stability. However, he has been gainfully employed for almost five 
years, yet his financial issues remain. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has not 
provided sufficient evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances in 
handling his mortgages or other debts once he fell behind on them. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies.  
 
Applicant indicated that he is pursuing bankruptcy, but there is insufficient 
evidence that he has actually done so. He provides no evidence of financial counseling. 
He provides no information about his current monthly income, his monthly expenses, or 
 
7 
 
 
his current ability to pay his debts. Without additional evidence, there are not clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
I credit Applicant with resolving some of the accounts he cites in his FORM 
response. But many of these accounts were resolved before the SOR was issued, as 
detailed in the credit reports.  
  
An applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying 
off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an 
applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct’, that 
is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.11 
 
 There is insufficient evidence of Applicant’s efforts to resolve his ongoing debts, 
which remain significant. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that 
he has a reasonable plan to resolve his debts, or that he has taken steps towards 
establishing a reliable financial track record. Applicant has not provided sufficient 
evidence of his good-faith efforts to repay his creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. AG 
¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd., May 21, 2008).  
 
8 
 
 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old Navy veteran. His retirement from the Navy and divorce 
in 2010 led to a significant loss of income and resulting financial problems. He 
experienced unstable employment before finding a position in the defense industry. 
Though he has been gainfully employed since 2012, his financial delinquencies have 
continued. He provided insufficient documentary evidence of his attempts to resolve his 
delinquent debts, many of which remain outstanding. Applicant does not have a reliable 
financial track record at this time. His finances remain a security concern. He has failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.o:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.p.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q-1.t:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.u:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.v-1.w:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.x:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.y:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
