 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03979 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol consumption or personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 28, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on May 9, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 16, 2016. On June 10, 2016, Applicant responded with a 
two page letter containing eight objections to various statements made in the FORM. I 
 
2 
 
have marked this two page letter as Applicant Exhibit (AE A) A. The case was assigned 
to me on March 20, 2017. The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 4 
included in the FORM are admitted in evidence. AE A is also admitted into evidence 
without objection.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
          Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He served honorably in the Air Force from 1979 to 
1988. He held previous security clearances while he was in the Air Force. He was 
divorced in 2008 after 30 years of marriage, and he re-married in September 2012.2 
Applicant obtained his bachelor’s degree in 1978, and two masters degrees in 1981 and 
1984.  
 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in July 2011.3 He first entered 
treatment in February 2011. The precipitating event to his treatment was a fall causing 
facial injuries and family intervention.4 He suffered a relapse in May 2011; again in 
October 2011; and again in September 2014.5 In February 2011, Applicant was asked 
by his family members to seek counseling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol.6 
Applicant received treatment for alcohol dependence at a treatment center in February 
2011 for 21 days; in May 2011 for 17 days; and, again from July 2, 2011 to July 19, 
2011.7 He also attended daily Alcoholic’s Anonymous meetings and participated in the 
12 step program.   
 
Applicant claims that he became depressed in early 2011 when his federal 
contractor employer lost a dream contract with NASA. On his last day on the job there, 
Applicant fell down and “cracked open his forehead.”8 Subsequent tests at the hospital 
determined that Applicant had liver problems. He fell again in his elderly mother’s 
kitchen in Mashpee, MA around May 2011, after drinking. He was re-admitted to the 
treatment center and completed 15 more days of treatment in May 2011.9 Applicant 
                                                          
1 Two page response to FORM dated June 10, 2016. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 4, discharge summary from a Treatment Center, on Cape Cod, and discharge diagnosis by 
Counselor George Gritzbach, licensed mental health counselor. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 1, Answer to SOR.  
 
6  Item 2, at page 40. 
 
7 Items 3 and 4. 
 
8 Item 3, summary of subject interview on January 8, 2014, at p. 4.  
 
9 Item 3, summary of subject interview on January 8, 2014, at p. 5.  
 
 
3 
 
next relapsed and drank again in October 2011.10 Applicant then remained sober from 
October 2011 until September 2014.  
 
Applicant moved south to a different state in August 2014 for a job. He was 
separated from his wife and he was lonely. While watching football, he consumed half of 
a nine pack of beer during the weekend of September 13 and 14, 2014.11 He consumed 
the remainder of that nine pack during the following weekend of September 20 and 21, 
2014. Applicant did not tell his wife about this relapse. He also didn’t tell the Office of 
Personnel Management investigator who interviewed Applicant on September 17, 2014, 
about his beer drinking a few days earlier. Indeed Applicant told the investigator that he 
last drank alcohol in October 2011.12 Applicant claims to no longer consume alcohol, 
and he has no intent to drink it in the future.13  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
10 Item 3, summary of subject interview on September 17, 2014, at p. 4.  
 
10 Item 3, summary of subject interview on September 24, 2014, at p. 2.  
 
11 Item 3, summary of subject interview on September 17, 2014, at p. 4. 
 
12 Item 3, summary of subject interview on September 17, 2014, at p. 4. 
 
13 Item 3, Answers to Interrogatories.  
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.  
 
  Applicant has relapsed at least twice since completing treatment and being 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent in July 2011. Although Applicant has abstained for 
some time now, and he has taken measures to address his disease, his last relapse 
was in September 2014. His period of abstinence is insufficient to find that he has fully 
 
5 
 
recovered, although we have every hope that he will do so. ¶ AG 22(e) and AG 22 (f) 
are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related problems are longstanding, and he has required 
family and emergency medical intervention, as well as treatment. Nonetheless, he has 
relapsed repeatedly. To his great credit, Applicant has acknowledged his issues of 
alcohol abuse, completed treatments, and claims to now be abstinent. Yet, it is 
premature to conclude that a relapse is unlikely to recur and that Applicant has 
demonstrated a sustained duration of abstinence. It is Applicant’s burden to establish 
any mitigating conditions. He did not do so. There are no mitigating conditions 
sufficiently applicable to dispel security concerns about Applicant’s alcohol use.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information in his response to 
an interrogatory, SOR ¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD 
Directive 5220.6, the Government is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence 
on facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or 
determined from the circumstances. Applicant responded negatively when asked in the 
interrogatory if he had ever been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Since he broached 
his alcoholism in his SCA, and discussed it further in the answers to interrogatories and 
subject interviews, it hardly seems likely that he was attempting to deceive. I accept 
Applicant’s explanation that he was unaware of the term “alcohol dependent” ever being 
used during his in-patient treatments.14 Applicant did not have his medical records, 
when he answered the interrogatory. Applicant might have inquired further, but didn’t. 
While this lack of due diligence may have been negligent, it does not show the specific 
intent necessary to find deliberate falsification of the response to interrogatory. 
Conversely, SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant failed to disclose his September 
2014 alcohol relapse to an authorized investigator for the Department of Defense during 
his September 17, 2014 interview. By his own admissions, in a later subject interview on 
September 24, 2014, Applicant stated that he relapsed and drank several beers on the 
weekend of September 13 – 14, 2014. Thus, his assertion that he last drank alcohol in 
October 2011, to the OPM investigator one week earlier, was a deliberate falsehood.  
Since he was living apart from his wife, when he relapsed in Virginia in 
September 2014, she did not know immediately about his most recent relapse. 
However, she was fully aware of his alcoholism already. Thus, I find that SOR ¶ 2.c is 
inapposite. While he may have delayed informing his spouse about the relapse, that 
does not constitute a disqualifying condition under AG E, in and of itself.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
14 Item 1, Answer to SOR.  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and G in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:              Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:                                   Against Applicant 
   
         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
