 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07333 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline K (handling 
protected information). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On August 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline K (handling protected 
information). The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.   
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On August 26, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing. On October 21, 2016, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On 
January 31, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On March 2, 2017, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for March 
14, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did not call 
any witnesses, and did not offer any evidence. I held the record open until April 14, 
2017, to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received into evidence 
without objection. On March 22, 2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). The 
record closed on April 14, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted with explanations all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following findings of facts. (Tr. 24) 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old manufacturing engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since November 1990. He seeks to reinstate his secret security clearance, 
which is a requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1, AE F; Tr. 17-20) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1988. (GE 1; Tr. 20) He was 
awarded an associate’s degree in May 2008. (GE 1; Tr. 20-21) Applicant married in 
June 1991 and has three adult children. His wife is employed full-time as an electronics 
and computer trainer at a local public library. (GE 1; Tr. 21-24) Applicant did not serve in 
the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 24) 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
The allegations are relatively straightforward and the facts are not in dispute. The 
SOR cites three separate security lapses. The first occurred in January 2013 when 
Applicant left an unclassified laptop in proximity to classified material. He placed his 
company-issued computer in his classified workspace, which is a triple-locked closed 
area, in order to safeguard it, forgetting that the computer had a wireless card and 
camera. (Tr. 26-41) 
 
The second occurred in December 2013 over a holiday stand-down period when 
Applicant did not adequately secure his workspace by failing to “spin the dial” on a door, 
one part of a three-lock process. The workspace was secured except for this portion of 
the three-lock process. (Tr. 41-53) 
 
Both of these lapses were Type 2 security violations. Each violation was 
thoroughly investigated and it was determined that no compromise of classified material 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
occurred on either occasion. Applicant was counseled on both occasions and received 
refresher training. (Tr. 37-39, 41, 74-75) 
 
The third occurred in May 2015 when Applicant did not to secure a classified 
security container by failing to secure the lock and complete the lock/unlock log within 
his secure triple-locked workspace. He further failed to stow properly a confidential 
portable USB hard drive within his secure workspace. This lapse was a Type 3 security 
violation. It was thoroughly investigated and it was determined there was no 
compromise of classified material. Applicant was counseled, received refresher training, 
and placed on security probation from June 2015 to June 2016. (Tr. 25, 59-70, 74-75) 
 
This incident ultimately lead to the revocation of Applicant’s security clearance 
approximately a year after the incident. Applicant had access to classified information 
until his clearance was revoked. (Tr. 25, 67-71) The day before his clearance was 
revoked, management inquired whether he was interested in becoming the facility 
security officer approached Applicant. (Tr. 57-59) 
 
Applicant did not attempt to deflect or avoid responsibility for these security 
lapses. He accepted full responsibility and recognized his mistakes saying, “I just 
messed up” or it was a “loss of concentration.” It was clear from Applicant’s demeanor 
that he was extremely disappointed in himself. He added that his son and his son’s 
fiancée are serving in the U.S. Army and that he would never do anything to jeopardize 
their security or the security of members of the armed forces. (Tr. 39, 53-54, 72-73) He 
credibly stated that he takes security matters very seriously. (Tr. 74) 
 
In August 2015, Applicant was involved in a serious motorcycle accident in which 
he lost a leg. He has been recovering and in rehabilitation since then and has worked 
approximately “a little over a month” since the accident. (Tr. 25, 54-57, 71-72, 75-77)  
 
Character Evidence  
 
 Applicant’s company continues to retain confidence in him and supports 
reinstatement of his clearance. (Tr. 71) A senior company official submitted a reference 
letter in his “unofficial capacity” lauding Applicant’s trustworthiness, dependability, 
judgment, and ethics. (AE A-B) Applicant submitted work performance evaluations 
covering 2012 to 2016 that reflect rock solid performance. (AE C-F) Applicant also 
submitted a reference letter from his pastor of 18 years, who provided favorable 
comments regarding his integrity, honesty, and overall good character. (AE G) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information  
 
  AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern relating to handling protected 
information as follows, “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and 
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard 
such information, and is a serious security concern.” 
 
  A review of the evidence supports application of two handling protected 
information disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 34(g) “any failure to comply with rules for the 
protection of classified or other sensitive information;” and AG ¶ (h) “negligence or lax 
security habits that persist despite counseling by management.” The 
 
Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(c) apply. Applicant realized his mistakes and responded 
favorably to counseling. He in no way attempted to minimize his lapses and accepted 
responsibility for his actions. It is clear that these lapses were inadvertent. Applicant has 
a positive attitude towards security and recognizes the importance properly 
safeguarding classified materials. It is noteworthy that Applicant’s employer maintains 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
confidence in him to the point of offering him the facility security officer position the day 
before his clearance was revoked. Applicant’s actions show sufficient effort, good 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of handling protected 
information security concerns. Even if handling protected information concerns are not 
mitigated under AG ¶¶ 35(a) through 35(c), they are mitigated under the whole-person 
concept, infra.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline K, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old manufacturing engineer, who apart from these security 
lapses has had 27 years of unblemished employment with a defense contractor. As 
noted, none of these security lapses were intentional or resulted in a compromise of 
classified material. Applicant was counseled and most recently paid a heavy price for 
his inattentiveness by having his clearance revoked. The matters of security strike close 
to home for Applicant having a son and his son’s fiancée serving in the U.S. Army. 
Lastly, his company continues to maintain confidence in him as evidenced by their 
offering him the facility security officer position the day before his clearance was 
revoked and continuing to support him to this day. 
 
Applicant’s character statements from a senior company official and his pastor 
emphasize his diligence, professionalism, efforts at security improvement, conscientious 
compliance with rules, dependability, loyalty, honesty, trustworthiness, and contributions 
to mission accomplishment. Applicant understands what he needs to do to maintain his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He expressed sincere remorse for his 
infractions of security rules and he emphasized his determination to conscientiously 
comply with all security rules and requirements. I am confident he will continue to 
conscientiously exercise his security responsibilities in the future.    
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Handling protected information concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
