 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02086 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on February 16, 2016. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received 
on February 26, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and provided no response 
to the FORM. The Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 through 6, are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 
2017.  
 Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g, and SOR ¶¶ 1.i – 1.t. She 
also provided amplifying comments and supporting information in a two-page Answer 
dated December 20, 2015. She attached four pages of supplemental documentation to 
her Answer. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
                      .    
   Applicant is 45 years old. She graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1994. She 
obtained a master’s degree in 2008. She is divorced and has two children,15 and 19 
years old. She has been employed by a federal contractor since November 2012. 
Previously, she was employed as a foreclosure paralegal at various law firms, and she 
had short periods of unemployment in between jobs. She reports losing approximately 
half of her household income when she divorced in 2007.3 
   
            SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e allege delinquencies for various student loans. In her Answer, 
Applicant asserted that “payment arrangements are in place in the amount of 
$134/month.” Yet, she attached only one receipt showing a payment of $134 on 
October 28, 2015. The total balance reflected on this receipt is $154,596.4 She 
presented no other evidence of a continued stream of payments on the student loans. 
Further, her Answer to SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i – 1.t, repeatedly asserts that “the 
account has been settled and the balance is $0.” Yet, with exception of one proof of 
payment document for $374 (SOR ¶ 1.g), Applicant has provided no substantiating 
documentation to show that these delinquent accounts have been settled.  
 
Ten of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR concern unnamed creditors for 
specified medical account numbers.5 In her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions submitted in November 2012, also known as her security clearance 
application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that she was involved in an automobile accident 
in September 2011, and a settlement was pending so that she could resolve all of these 
medical debts within the next year. She received the settlement in late 2012.6 The 
delinquent medical debts have still not been resolved.7  
                                                          
3 GE 3 at p. 34.  
 
4 GE 2, attached receipt.   
 
5 GE 1.  
 
6 GE 3, at p. 37. 
 
7  GE 4 and 5 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
   Applicant repeatedly stated “I deny; I could not locate this account on my credit  
           reports” in her Answer to SOR ¶¶ 1.h, and 1u – 1.x.8 Yet, these delinquent debts are 
plainly reflected in her credit bureau reports. Further, Applicant disclosed and discussed 
the delinquent debt at SOR ¶ 1.v in section 26 of her SCA9, as well as the delinquent 
debts owed for SOR ¶¶ 1.w and 1.x.10 
 
                                              Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
                                                          
8 GE 2. 
 
9 GE 3, at p. 33. 
 
10 GE 3, at p. 35. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of 
income is also a trustworthiness concern. It may indicate proceeds from 
financially profitable criminal acts.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding sensitive 
information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted to 19 of the 24 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The 
receipt she attached to her Answer to the SOR, indicates that the total outstanding 
balance for the delinquent student loans alone is over $154,000. Many of the delinquent 
debts are over five years old, and resulted from injuries sustained in her automobile 
accident in 2011. She received a settlement approximately one year after the 
 
5 
 
 
automobile accident, but she provided no evidence showing what she did with those 
funds received in the settlement. She obtained her most recent degree in 2008. 
Applicant has shown no payments on the related student loans. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and,  
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
  Applicant disclosed some of her financial problems in her SCA. She has provided 
documentation to show one payment of $134 on her student loan debt; a “proof of 
payment” for SOR ¶ 1.g; and a collection letter with scribbling in the margins which may 
be indicative of payment on the account at SOR ¶ 1.r. She has produced no other 
documentation to show payments or progress on the other 21 delinquent debts alleged. 
The delinquencies alleged in the SOR are recent and ongoing. Arguably, her divorce in 
2007, periods of unemployment, and automobile accident, were conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control. Yet, she has not demonstrated that she has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. She has provided no evidence of counseling, good-faith efforts to 
repay creditors, or that her financial problems have been resolved or are under control. 
None of the mitigating conditions enumerated above, applies.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a concern. She has not met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1. a – 1.f:                  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:          For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.h – 1. X:                   Against Applicant    
 
            Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a  
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
