 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-03303 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his tax-related financial problems. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a 
determination on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On March 7, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to 
Applicant six exhibits that the Government offers for admission into the administrative 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
record, including Exhibit 4, a summary of Applicant’s security clearance interview. 
These exhibits are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
 Applicant received the FORM on March 15, 2016, and was given 30 days to 
submit a response, including evidence in mitigation and extenuation. He did not submit 
a response within the allotted time.  
 
 On February 13, 2017, I was assigned the case. After confirming Applicant’s 
continuing sponsorship for a clearance and recognizing the considerable amount of time 
and expense already expended, I reopened the record to provide him a final opportunity 
to submit a response.2 He timely submitted a response on March 6, 2017, which was 
marked Exhibit A and admitted into the administrative record without objection.3  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
DOHA proceedings are designed to provide for a full, fair, and accurate record of 
an applicant’s security clearance eligibility.4 In order to achieve these goals, the 
Directive states that the federal rules of evidence “shall serve as a guide.”5 Furthermore, 
the DOHA Appeal Board has stated that administrative judges should liberally apply the 
“technical rules of evidence” and err on the side of admitting relevant and reliable 
evidence.6  
 
The Directive, however, does contain one major exception to this liberal 
evidentiary rule of inclusion. Specifically, pursuant to Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, 
a DOD personnel background report of investigation (“ROI”), including the summary a 
government investigator prepares of an applicant’s security clearance interview, is 
generally inadmissible.7 The danger posed by an unauthenticated clearance interview, 
which an applicant has not affirmatively adopted as their own statement,8 is self-evident. 
                                                          
2 Administrative documents, including confirmation of Applicant’s continuing sponsorship for a clearance, 
were collectively marked Appellate Exhibit I.  
 
3 Exhibit A consists of Applicant’s March 6, 2017 e-mail; IRS statement, dated October 6, 2016 (3 pages); 
and Treasury Department statement, dated July 1, 2016 (1 page). 
  
4 Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.19; E3.1.25. See also, ISCR Case No. 99-0477 (App. Bd. July 25, 2000) (overall 
purpose of industrial security clearance program is “a full and fair adjudication of cases on the merits.”) 
 
5 Directive, ¶ E3.1.19. 
 
6 ISCR Case No 03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007) (“the DOHA process encourages Judges to err 
on the side of initially admitting evidence into the record, and then to consider . . . what, if any, weight to 
give to that evidence.”). See also ISCR Case No. 14-06011 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (“The weight that a 
Judge assigns to evidence is a matter within his or her discretion.”). 
 
7 See also Directive, ¶ E3.1.22, prohibiting the admission of a third-party statement adverse to an 
applicant on a controverted issue, which arguably a summary prepared by an investigator may constitute. 
8 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014); ISCR Case No. 09-
06218 (App. Bd. Sep. 6, 2011) (error not to admit or fully consider summary of clearance interview that 
applicant adopted as his own). 
 
3 
 
An investigator, whether intentionally or negligently, may incorrectly summarize the 
clearance interview.9  
 
At the same time, the summary of the clearance interview may contain accurate, 
reliable, and relevant favorable information that an applicant will want considered (or, 
may assume a judge will consider in the absence of an objection).10 Accordingly, it is 
generally an applicant who holds the proverbial “key” as to the admissibility of the 
summary.11 An issue, however, arises when an applicant does not respond to the 
FORM or otherwise affirmatively indicates that they are waiving their objection to the 
summary’s admission into evidence.   
 
DOHA administrative judges have treated such situations in two different ways. 
One set of judges excludes a summary unless an applicant explicitly waives the E3.1.20 
authentication requirement,12 while another group of judges admits the summary, 
finding that an applicant’s failure to raise an objection constitutes a waiver of the 
authentication rule.13 This split appears to only extend to those pro se applicants who 
elect a decision on the written record. The same concern that has led some judges to 
exclude interview summaries offered with a FORM does not appear to extend to pro se 
applicants who elect a hearing – whether or not such applicants are informed that they 
can object to a summary’s admission on authentication grounds. 
 
                                                          
9 See e.g. Department of Justice (DOJ) Press Release, U.S. Investigations Services Agrees to Forego at 
Least $30 Million to Settle False Claims Act Allegations, August 19, 2015, publically available at 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-investigations-services-agrees-forego-least-30-million-settle-false-
claims-act-allegations; DOJ Press Release, Former Background Investigator For Federal Government 
Pleads Guilty To Making A False Statement, April 24, 2014, publically available at 
https://www.justice.gov/usao-dc/pr/former-background-investigator-federal-government-pleads-guilty-
making-false-statement-1.  
  
10 ISCR Case No. 15-05252 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (judge erred in sua sponte excluding summary of 
clearance interview submitted with FORM, as applicant apparently believed the summary would be 
considered as she had not raised an objection).  
 
11 The Government can overcome an objection by properly authenticating the summary of the clearance 
interview and establishing that that the interview is otherwise admissible under the federal rules of 
evidence. See E3.1.20. 
 
12 See e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-00262 at 2 (A.J. Leonard Feb. 15, 2017) (notwithstanding explicit warning 
in FORM explaining to applicant that they could object to the summary’s admission, judge still excluded 
the summary because “I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, 
which is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement.”). See 
also, ISCR Case No. 15-02643 at 2 (A.J. Noel Apr. 24, 2017) (same); ISCR Case No. 15-01554 at 2 (A.J. 
Hogan Feb. 24, 2016) (similar basis for exclusion). 
 
13 See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-05009 n.1 (A.J. Foreman Feb. 10, 2017) (“Department Counsel informed 
Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of Item 4 [summary of clearance interview]; 
make corrections, additions, deletions, or updates; or object to the lack of authentication. I have treated 
his lack of response to the FORM as a waiver of any objections to Item 4.”). See also ISCR Case No. 14-
05326 at 2 (A.J. Crean April 5, 2017) (finding wavier of authentication rule where applicant failed to 
respond to FORM); ISCR Case No. 12-05597 at 2 (A.J. Rivera Dec. 9, 2016) (same).  
 
4 
 
At least one Appeal Board member has expressed some concern or reservation 
in finding that a pro se applicant, who elects a decision on the written record, waives the 
authentication requirement when he or she fails to respond to a FORM. See ISCR Case 
No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (AJ Ra’anan’s concurring opinion). 
Nevertheless, the Appeal Board in a recent unanimous decision held that a summary of 
a clearance interview offered with a FORM was properly admitted by a judge where: (1) 
the pro se applicant did not raise an objection to the summary’s admission and (2) there 
was no indication the summary contained inaccurate information. ISCR Case No. 15-
01807 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2017).14  
 
Here, as in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, Applicant was on clear notice that he could 
object to the summary,15 elected not to raise an objection, and there is no indication that 
the summary contains inaccurate information. Additionally, Applicant’s response to the 
FORM, where he attacks various points raised by Department Counsel, tends to 
corroborate the relevant information contained in the summary.16 For all these reasons, 
the summary of the clearance interview, Exhibit 4, is admitted into evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 72, is married with two adult-age children. He is a college graduate 
and was first granted a security clearance in 1967. 
 
 In September 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA), 
presumably as part of a periodic reinvestigation. In response to relevant questions 
about his finances, Applicant disclosed on the SCA that he had failed to file his income 
tax returns for several years and owed about $55,000 in past-due taxes. He also noted 
that he had filed all overdue tax returns and, with the help of his accountant, was 
working with the IRS to resolve his past-due taxes.  
 
A few months later, Applicant sat down with an investigator for his clearance 
interview. He told the investigator that his financial problems started in the mid-1990s 
when an economic downturn left him unable to pay the mortgages on his home and 
investment properties. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but was only able to make 
the required plan payments for six months. He lost his home and investment properties 
to foreclosure. He was able to convince a friend to purchase his former home and was 
                                                          
14 See also ISCR Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016) (failure to raise an objection to an 
exhibit offered by the Government with the FORM waives it); ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at n. 6 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 7, 2004) (“An applicant can waive his or her objection to the admissibility of evidence even though 
the Directive is silent on the matter of waiver.”); ISCR Case No. 08-12061 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2009) 
("Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like a lawyer, they are expected to take timely, 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. If they fail to take timely, reasonable steps to 
protect their rights, that failure to act does not constitute a denial of their rights.").  
 
15 See FORM n.1.  
 
16 ISCR Case No. 95-0817 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 1997) (Judge erred in sua sponte excluding portion of an 
ROI that was submitted by Department Counsel as evidence with a FORM under E3.1.20, because 
“[n]owhere in Applicant's energetic criticisms of various portions of the FORM does he challenge the 
completeness, accuracy, or truthfulness of FORM Item 5 [clearance interview] or any portion of it.”)  
 
5 
 
able to stay in it until the present day, paying rent to his friend. He indicates that he is 
now in the financial position to purchase back the home from his friend.  
 
Applicant stopped filing his federal and state income tax returns around the time 
he started experiencing financial trouble in the mid-1990s. He stated during his 2014 
clearance interview that he was “overwhelmed” by his financial problems and was 
unable to file his returns. (Exhibit 4 at 4) He informed the investigator that, starting in the 
1990s, he had tax liens filed against him and his wages were garnished to satisfy past-
due taxes. (Exhibit 4 at 4-5) He also told the investigator that he had filed all his overdue 
federal tax returns as of the date of the clearance interview and was in the process of 
filing his overdue state tax returns.  
 
The SOR alleges that, in 2012 and 2013, federal tax liens totaling more than 
$100,000 were filed against Applicant. These liens are listed on Applicant’s 2014 credit 
report, Exhibit 5. Applicant provided documentation showing that, as of July 2016, he 
still owed over $28,000 in past-due taxes for the 2004 tax year. His federal tax debt for 
tax years 2004 – 2008 and 2014 totals over $58,000. He presented no documentation 
that the federal tax liens were released, satisfied, or otherwise resolved.  
 
Applicant was paying his past-due federal taxes through an installment 
agreement, which he entered into with the IRS in about October 2014 (a month after 
submitting his SCA). He stopped submitting the required monthly installment payments 
in approximately June 2016, when the IRS filed notice that it would begin garnishing a 
portion of his social security income to satisfy his federal tax debt.  
 
The SOR also alleges that Applicant owes over $500,000 for a state tax lien, 
which was filed against him in 2007. This state tax lien is listed on Applicant’s 2014 
credit report, Exhibit 5. Applicant submitted a state court document with his Answer that 
reflects his state secured a $512,000 judgment against him in August 2007 for past-due 
state income taxes. Applicant filed his overdue state tax returns and resolved his past-
due state taxes by paying an agreed-upon settlement of less than $7,000. He did so 
several months after his 2014 clearance interview. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
6 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.17  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s tax-related financial problems, as alleged in the SOR, raise the 
financial considerations security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
                                                          
17 See also ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 2011). 
 
7 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions:18 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 An applicant who fails to timely file or pay his or her taxes, a basic and 
fundamental financial obligation of all citizens, bears a heavy burden in mitigating the 
financial considerations security concern. An administrative judge should closely 
examine the circumstances giving rise to an applicant’s tax-related issues and his or her 
response to it. Furthermore, an applicant’s claim of financial reform must be weighed 
against the overriding concerns about the individual’s lack of judgment and history of 
not abiding by rules and regulations in failing to timely file or pay their taxes.  
 
 The disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. Applicant 
failed to establish any of the available mitigating conditions. Although matters beyond 
his control may have initially impacted his ability to timely file and pay his taxes, these 
matters occurred some 20 years ago and he has repeatedly failed to abide by his tax 
obligations. He failed to timely file his tax returns and pay his taxes even after tax liens, 
judgments, and wage garnishments were filed against him. The record evidence reflects 
that Applicant is unwilling or unable to comply with his lawful tax obligations and may 
similarly fail to abide by his security obligations.  
                                                          
18 Applicant’s extensive history of failing to file his income tax returns and pay his taxes were not alleged 
in the SOR. For purposes of determining which disqualifying conditions apply, I have only considered the 
tax liens referenced in the SOR and the relevant circumstances leading to their filing. Matters not alleged 
in the SOR were only considered for the limited purpose of assessing Applicant’s mitigation case and the 
whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2(a). Compare ISCR Case No. 15-00216 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2016) 
(proper use of non-alleged tax debts in examining financial considerations security concerns), with, ISCR 
Case No. 12-11375 (App. Bd. June 17, 2016) (where Board held that judge improperly weighed and 
considered non-alleged tax issues).  
 
8 
 
 Additionally, the timing of when Applicant took action to resolve his longstanding 
financial problems does not support a finding of positive and permanent behavioral 
change. Instead, the timing strongly suggests that Applicant took such remedial action 
as a means to gain or maintain a clearance. ISCR Case No. 10-05909 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 27, 2012) (“The manner and timing of debt repayment were matters that the Judge 
was entitled to consider. . . . The Judge concluded that the impending security 
clearance process was the major factor in prompting Applicant to act.”) 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant’s federal tax debt stands at over $58,000 and includes a 
significant amount of back taxes from 2004. This sizeable amount of tax debt includes 
Applicant’s recent failure to pay his 2014 taxes when due. Applicant’s federal tax debt is 
about the same amount as first reported on the SCA, which Applicant submitted nearly 
three years ago.  
 
 In short, the circumstances under which Applicant incurred the large tax liens 
alleged in the SOR and the lack of a sufficient track record of voluntary compliance with 
his tax obligations undercuts the mitigating value of Applicant’s belated efforts to resolve 
his longstanding tax debts. After thoroughly considering the record evidence and the 
whole-person factors in AG ¶ 2(a), I find that Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden 
of persuasion. Overall, significant questions and doubts about Applicant’s present 
eligibility for (continued) access to classified information remain.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
