 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-06894 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
April 5, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 13, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On June 16, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) 
and C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 8, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
September 5, 2016. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on September 13, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 26, 2016. The Government 
offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits I through XXI. Department 
Counsel had no objection, and the exhibits were admitted into the record. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 3, 2016. Based on a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the Republic of Colombia (Colombia). (Tr. 16, 69-70.) The 
request and the referenced documents were not admitted into evidence but were included 
in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35, single, and has a bachelor’s degree. He has been employed by a 
defense contractor since 2015, and seeks a security clearance in connection with his 
employment in the defense industry. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are findings of fact. 
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B – Foreign Influence) 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has foreign connections that may show divided loyalties, or make him 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion.  
 
Applicant was born in Colombia in 1980. He moved to the United States in 2000 
to attend college. He became a naturalized American citizen in 2008. (Tr. 30-33; 
Government Exhibit 1 at Section 9.) 
 
Applicant’s parents are both Colombian citizens and reside there. His father is a 
semi-retired teacher. Applicant’s mother owns a small shop. Applicant has one sister, who 
lives permanently in the United States with her American husband and child. (Tr. 36-40.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has visited his parents about five or six times in Colombia since he came 
to the United States. The last time was in June 2015. His parents travel to the United 
States about once a year to see Applicant, as well as their daughter and grandchild. 
Applicant’s parents plan on moving to the United States full-time once Applicant’s father 
retires. (Tr. 35-36, 39-40, 47.) 
 
Applicant has an American-born girlfriend. He has substantial assets in the United 
States, as opposed to none in Colombia. He testified, “I never had a bank account, never 
worked in Colombia, don’t have anything that really - - any attachments.” He also states, 
“I lived almost half of my life here [the United States]. Everything I’ve done, my 
professional career, my education, everything is here.” (Tr. 41, 52, 70-72.) 
 
Applicant has no plans to move back to Colombia. The United States is his home, 
and he knows that his work in the defense industry is making a difference for the national 
defense. (Tr. 51-52, 66-67.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C – Foreign Preference) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has acted in a way that shows a preference for another country ahead of the 
United States.  
 
 As stated, Applicant did not work in the defense industry before 2015. In addition 
to his American passport, he had a Colombian passport that was due to expire in 2018. 
The Colombian passport was required by Colombian authorities for travel there, even for 
naturalized American citizens. (Tr. 44-46.) 
 
 Once Applicant received the SOR he learned of the security clearance regulations 
concerning possession of a foreign passport. At that point he immediately surrendered 
his passport to his Facility Security Officer (FSO), who provided written documentation of 
that fact. (Tr. 43-44, 49; Applicant Exhibits III and IV.) 
 
 On September 16, 2016, Applicant formally renounced his Colombian citizenship, 
through the Colombian consulate. His petition for renunciation was granted. He no longer 
possesses Colombian citizenship. As a result, his Colombian passport has been 
invalidated. (Tr. 46, 49-52; Applicant Exhibits V, VII, and VIII.)   
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is a highly-respected person and employee. His direct manager 
submitted a letter on Applicant’s behalf. (Applicant Exhibit X.) The manager states, 
“[Applicant] is always very respectful of privacy, classified information, rules and 
restrictions.” 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In September 2016 Applicant received a “High Potential Retention Award” from his 
current employer. This is a cash-based incentive award offered to a small number of non-
executive employees who commit to stay with the company for several years. (Applicant 
Exhibit XI.) He has received other recognition from his current employer, and his 
evaluations show an employee of considerable talent and potential. (Applicant Exhibits 
XII through XV.)  
 
 Though he does not currently have a security clearance, he has taken classes that 
have taught him how to work with sensitive information in the government realm. 
(Applicant Exhibits XVI through XXI.) His corporate FSO submitted a letter indicating that 
Applicant did not have any security incidents or security violations in his file. (Applicant 
Exhibit IX.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Applicant has contacts with Colombia. Accordingly, it is appropriate to discuss the 
situation in Colombia at this time.1 Colombia is a constitutional multiparty democracy, and 
a close ally of the United States. The country has had major problems with terrorism and 
narco-terrorism. However, a peace accord with the major insurgent group shows promise 
for a more peaceful future for Colombia. The Department of State noted on April 5, 2016, 
“Security in Colombia has improved significantly in recent years.” (Administrative Notice 
Document IV at 1.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
                                                 
1All of the following statements are supported by the documents submitted by the Department Counsel in 
support of his request for administrative notice and its attachments.  
 
 
5 
 
 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B – Foreign Influence) 
 
The concern under Guideline B is styled as follows at AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has family connections to Colombia, specifically his parents, which can 
be viewed under a heightened risk standard because of the general security situation in 
Colombia. The following Disqualifying Condition applies to this case under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant has provided compelling evidence to show that the following Mitigating 
Conditions under AG ¶ 8 also apply to this case, given his particular background:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant proved that he is a conscientious and patriotic American citizen, and 
member of the defense industry. He has demonstrated that, while he is in contact with his 
parents in Colombia, there is no conflict of interest, because his sense of loyalty or 
obligation to Colombia is minimal. Further, he has deep and longstanding loyalties to the 
U.S. He has lived in the United States permanently since he was 19, graduated from 
college here, and has shown himself to be an able and talented employee of great 
potential. He plans to remain in the United States permanently. He has formally 
renounced his Colombian citizenship by actively taking steps through the Colombian 
consulate to have it rescinded. Applicant presented evidence of substantial ties to the 
United States. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U. S. 
interest. Guideline B is found for Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C – Foreign Preference) 
 
 In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial 
evidence that Applicant is a dual citizen of Colombia and the United States, and that he 
had a valid Colombian passport. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has mitigated the Government’s concerns about his dual citizenship with 
Colombia, and his possession and use of a Colombian passport while an American 
citizen. The concern is stated thus under this Guideline at AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through foreign citizenship of a family member. 
This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 Applicant was a dual citizen of the United States and Colombia. He possessed and 
used his Colombian passport that he renewed after becoming a U.S. citizen. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; 
and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant, who was born in Colombia, exercised Colombian citizenship by 
renewing that passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He used it to travel to Colombia 
several times because the Colombian government did not permit dual citizens to enter 
the country without possessing a Colombian passport. However, he has surrendered that 
passport to his FSO, and officially renounced his Colombian citizenship. All three 
mitigating conditions are applicable to his situation. Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I specifically considered the 
situation in Colombia. I find that there is little or no “potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). Using the whole-person standard, 
Applicant has mitigated the security significance of his alleged foreign connections and 
foreign preference, and is eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
