 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-06615 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
April 27, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 21, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On May 9, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 
2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 7, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on July 28, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 2, 2016. The Defense Office 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on August 9, 2016. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 16, 2016. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through F, which were also 
admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until 
October 14, 2016, to permit him to submit additional evidence. Applicant elected not to 
submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 26, 2016. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and currently holds a 
security clearance in connection with this employment. He was married, but he and his 
wife were divorced in 2005. He received an Honorable Discharge from the Marine Corps. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 15, 17.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant 
admitted allegations 1.f and 1.g in the SOR under this Paragraph. He denied the 
remaining allegations (1.a to 1.e). (Answer.) Applicant submitted additional evidence to 
support his request for access to classified information. 
 
 The SOR lists two state tax liens, totaling approximately $39,181. (SOR 1.a and 
1.d.) The SOR also lists a Federal tax lien in the amount of $25,739. (SOR 1.b.) In 
addition, the SOR lists three past-due consumer debts, which total $1,497. (SOR 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.g.) The existence and amount of the debts is supported by credit reports submitted 
by the Government dated April 21, 2015; and July 28, 2016. (Government Exhibits 5, and 
6.) In addition, Applicant submitted a credit report dated August 8, 2016. (Applicant Exhibit 
A.)1 Finally, Applicant is alleged to have failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2006, 2007, and 2008. (SOR 1.c.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he did not file his Federal and state tax returns for 2006, 2007, 
and 2008 in a timely manner because he did not have the money at that time to pay his 
taxes. He went on to explain that the cause of his financial problems in those years was 
connected to a failed business partnership, where his partner absconded with Applicant’s 
money, as well as debts related to his divorce in 2005. Applicant testified that he has filed 
tax returns for those three years, and has filed all of his subsequent tax returns in a timely 
fashion. (Tr. 20-30, 48.)2  
 
                                                 
1 See Government Exhibits 3, and 4. 
2 See Applicant Exhibit B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Concerning his unpaid Federal taxes, the IRS filed a lien against Applicant in the 
amount of $63,188.60 on December 28, 2010, concerning tax years 2006, 2007, and 
2008. This lien included the amount in SOR 1.b. Applicant worked overtime at his 
employment, had his tax refunds applied to the back taxes, and resolved all of these liens, 
which is shown by a Release of Tax Lien from the IRS dated March 25, 2015, and the 
most recent credit report in the record. (Applicant Exhibits A and C; Tr. 32-34, 38-41.) 
 
 As stated, Applicant owed his state taxing authority $39,181 in back taxes for the 
2006, 2007, and 2008 tax years. His state taxing authority filed liens against Applicant in 
2011 and 2012. The taxing authority also attached Applicant’s wages, and he negotiated 
a payment plan with them. Once again, Applicant worked overtime at his employment, 
had his tax refunds applied to his back taxes, and successfully paid off these liens, which 
were released in 2015. He submitted documentation from the taxing authority dated 
August 17, 2015, showing that he had no taxes due from tax year 2006 through tax year 
2014. (Government Exhibits 3 and 4; Applicant Exhibits A and B; Tr. 32-34, 38-41.) 
 
 It is alleged in SOR 1.e that Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt 
in the amount of $723. Applicant submitted documentation showing that he paid this debt 
in full in February 2015 to a collection agency. It is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit D; Tr. 50.) 
 
 It is alleged in SOR 1.f that Applicant is indebted to a time share company for a 
charged-off account in the amount of $419. Applicant testified that he contacted the 
creditor in 2015 and, because they had already charged off the debt, they were not willing 
to allow Applicant to pay the debt off. (Answer; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Finally, it is alleged that Applicant owed a bank $355 for a past-due debt. In his 
Answer Applicant stated, “I can’t confirm or deny it is paid. I’m waiting for a response from 
[the bank].” He was unable to provide any further information during the hearing. 
However, the credit reports in the record show that the original bank sold the debt to 
another lender, and closed the account in approximately 2011. The credit reports go on 
to show that a collection agency purchased a debt from this bank in the approximate 
amount of $449 before May 2012. The reports further show that Applicant paid this debt 
in full for less than full balance in approximately February 2015. This corresponds to the 
time Applicant paid the debt in SOR 1.e, and it was also the year his tax liens were 
released. Based on all of the available evidence, I find this debt has been resolved. 
(Government Exhibits 5 and 6; Applicant Exhibit A; 50-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He submitted documents showing 
that he has sufficient income every month, as well as savings and investments. Applicant 
is able to maintain his current debts, as shown by his credit report. (Applicant Exhibits A, 
E, and F; Tr. 43, 52-53.)     
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, three apply to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 Applicant, based on documentary and testimonial evidence, had three delinquent 
accounts, and state and Federal tax liens, that he formerly could not resolve. He also 
admitted not filing in a timely fashion his 2006, 2007, and 2008 income tax returns. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions may 
be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ In addition, AG ¶ 20(b) 
states that disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”   
 
 The evidence shows that both of the above mitigating conditions apply to 
Applicant. His financial problems began when he got divorced in 2005, and then his 
business partner embezzled money from Applicant, leaving him in a financial hole. 
Applicant admittedly did not file his tax returns in a timely fashion for those years, because 
he could not afford to pay the taxes. This was foolish on his part, and has been rectified. 
He stated that he has filed all of his subsequent tax returns in a timely fashion, and paid 
 
 
6 
 
 
all assessed late-filing penalties and interest, for the years he missed. In addition, after 
the Federal and state taxing authorities began to file liens and levy on his salary, Applicant 
worked overtime and made payment arrangements to pay these debts off in as short a 
period as possible. The evidence shows that, in the span of about two years, Applicant 
paid approximately $128,108 in back taxes. With regard to the three small consumer 
debts, Applicant provided evidence that he paid two, and that he was only unable to pay 
the third because the creditor had written it off and refused to accept payment. 
 
 Based on the particular facts of this case, I find that Applicant has “initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” as required by AG ¶ 
20(d). Applicant has not received financial counseling. However, as shown above, his 
current financial situation is stable. I find that “there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant has acted in a 
way that shows good judgment, resolving his financial situation through working hard and 
paying well over $100,000 in back taxes and other debts over a three-year period, which 
has given him a fresh start. All of the stated mitigating conditions apply to the facts of this 
case. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s current financial 
situation is stable, and he has resolved all but a miniscule percentage of his once large 
past-due indebtedness. I find that there is little or no “potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). In addition, Applicant’s current 
financial status shows permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6), and there is 
little likelihood of continuation or recurrence under AG ¶ 2(a)(9). Using the whole-person 
 
 
7 
 
 
standard, Applicant has mitigated the security significance of his financial considerations, 
and is eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                  
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
