 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04958 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his tax-related financial issues and falsification of his security clearance application. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
Department Counsel, thereafter, amended the SOR to allege pertinent matters under both 
guidelines under consideration.2 Applicant answered the initial and amended SOR 
(hereinafter collectively referred to as the SOR), and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 The Government’s motion to amend the SOR and Applicant’s answers to the new SOR allegations were 
collectively marked Appellate Exhibit (App. Exh.) I.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant’s hearing was initially scheduled for February 14, 2017, but was 
rescheduled for March 21, 2017, to provide him sufficient time to answer and address the 
new SOR allegations. The hearing was held on this later date.3  
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered at hearing and post-
hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. (Government 
Exhibits 1 – 12 and Applicant’s Exhibits A – M)4 The transcript (Tr.) was received and the 
record closed on March 29, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is married with two adult-aged children. He is a high school graduate and 
has completed some college. He has worked in the information technology field as a 
contractor for the federal government and held a security clearance for nearly 30 years. 
(Tr. 12-13, 34-36) 
 
Applicant’s current tax-related financial problems date back to 2010. His tax 
preparer, in the process of preparing and filing Applicant’s 2009 tax year income tax 
return, informed Applicant that he was not withholding a sufficient amount in taxes from 
his salary. At the time, Applicant was not having any income taxes withheld from his pay. 
He testified that he attempted to correct his withholdings, but he repeatedly failed to 
withhold a sufficient amount from his pay and his tax situation swelled. His federal tax 
debt for tax years 2009-2014 is over $65,000, which were reduced to lien judgments. He 
also has over $15,000 in state tax liens that were filed against him between 2012 and 
2014. (Tr. 46-47, 73-74; Exhibits 5-10) 
 
In about March 2016, Applicant entered into an installment agreement with the IRS 
to resolve his federal tax debt. He only made two to three plan payments before stopping. 
He is now attempting to negotiate a settlement with the IRS with the assistance of a 
private tax firm. Applicant’s past-due federal taxes, which are referenced at SOR 1.h and 
1.i and total over $65,000, remain unresolved. (Tr. 20-23, 51-54, 68-74; Exhibit E) 
 
In February 2017, with the assistance of the tax firm, Applicant entered into an 
agreement with the state tax authority to resolve his outstanding state tax debt. He did 
so, in part, to resolve a state hold on tags needed to drive his car. Post-hearing, he made 
the first monthly payment of $343. No evidence was presented that the four state tax 
liens, which are referenced at SOR 1.d – 1.g and total over $15,000, were satisfied, 
released or otherwise resolved. (Tr. 17-22, 45-50, 71-74; Exhibit D, Exhibit I) 
 
Applicant explained that his current tax problem was primarily due to his failure to 
withhold a sufficient amount in taxes from his salary. He was also working two jobs and 
                                                          
3 Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearings, and case management order were marked and are 
attached to the record as App. Exh. II – IV. 
 
4 Department Counsel’s discovery letters, dated June 24, 2016 and February 7, 2017, were collectively 
marked App. Exh. V. Post-hearing correspondence was marked App. Exh. VI.  
 
3 
 
 
a lot of overtime, with an increase in income that placed him in a higher tax bracket. He 
experienced similar tax problems in the past and paid his taxes after liens were filed. Tax 
liens were filed against Applicant for past-due state taxes in 2002, 2003, 2005, and 2006.5 
(Tr. 17, 20, 46, 49-50, 54-58; Exhibit 11) 
 
 In September 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) as 
part of a periodic background investigation. He was asked the following question: 
 
Taxes. In the past seven (7) years have you failed to file or pay Federal, 
state, or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?6 
 
Applicant answered “no” to this question and to all the questions on the SCA asking if he 
had any other potentially adverse financial information to report. Specifically, he answered 
“no” to questions asking him to report tax liens, judgments, and other past-due debts. 
(Exhibit 1) 
 
At hearing, Applicant explained that when he submitted the SCA he knew he had 
resolved some tax debts in the past, but was uncertain as to the amount of back taxes he 
owed. He also stated, in explaining why he had not listed an $18,500 judgment from 2010 
and some minor delinquent debt, that he was unaware of his delinquent accounts 
because he did not review a credit report before submitting the SCA. (Tr. 24-29, 63-67, 
74-75) 
 
 Applicant plans to obtain financial counseling. He presented documents showing 
that, as of December 2016, he had past-due balances on both of his car loans. He also 
presented a January 2017 bank statement, which in part shows that he was assessed 
“returned item,” “overdraft fees,” and a “negative account balance fee” for the period of 
December 2016 to January 2017.7 He recently started a second job to help pay off his 
past-due taxes. He submitted documentation showing he had addressed the debts listed 
in SOR 1.a – 1.c totaling about $1,000. In 2016, Applicant earned approximately 
$130,000. He and his wife’s combined household income for 2016 was about $200,000. 
(Tr. 29-33, 37-41, 58-65, 71; Exhibits A-C, Exhibit H)  
 
  
                                                          
5 These tax liens, which were subsequently resolved by Applicant, were not alleged in the SOR and are not 
being considered for disqualification purposes. They are only being considered in assessing Applicant’s 
mitigation case and whole-person factors. Contrast with ISCR Case No. 12-11375 (App. Bd. June 17, 2016) 
(non-alleged tax issues considered in a manner inconsistent with such limited and proper purposes).  
 
6 Exhibit 1 at 31 (emphasis in original). 
 
7 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted documentation showing that he scheduled debits from his bank account 
to pay some of his recurring monthly debts, including his delinquent car loans. These debits from his bank 
account were scheduled for March 31, 2017.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of tax-related financial problems, as alleged in the SOR, raise 
the financial considerations security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18:8 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                          
8 The minor debts referenced in SOR 1.a – 1.c totaling about $1,000 are immaterial. See ISCR Case No. 
15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (remanding case, in part, for judge to explain how $1,000 in 
delinquent debt raised a security concern under Guideline F).  
 
6 
 
 
 An applicant who fails to timely file or pay his or her taxes, a basic and fundamental 
financial obligation of all citizens, bears a heavy burden in mitigating the financial 
considerations security concern.9 An administrative judge should closely examine the 
circumstances giving rise to an applicant’s tax-related issues and his or her response to 
it. Furthermore, an applicant’s claim of financial reform must be weighed against the 
overriding concern about the individual’s lack of judgment and history of failing to abide 
by rules and regulations in failing to timely file or pay their taxes.10 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation was not caused by matters beyond his control 
and he took no discernible action to address his tax situation until his clearance was in 
jeopardy. He has not obtained financial counseling and, as evidenced by his own exhibits, 
he has yet to take control of his finances. None of the potential mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Over the course of six years, from 2009 to 2014, Applicant repeatedly failed to 
withhold a sufficient amount from his salary to pay his federal and state income taxes. He 
was gainfully employed as a federal contractor during this entire period, earning a six-
figure salary in 2016. He stopped making payments per the terms of the IRS installment 
plan after just two or three months and shortly before the hearing entered into an 
agreement to resolve his longstanding state tax issue. He failed to present evidence of a 
reliable track record of debt repayment and compliance with his tax obligations. Applicant 
also failed to show that similar security-significant financial issues are unlikely to recur.11  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to disclose potentially 
disqualifying information about his financial record. Specifically, he did not disclose: (1) 
his failure timely pay his taxes, (2) the four state tax liens entered against him between 
2012 and 2014, and (3) a 2010 judgment for over $18,500.12 A deliberate falsification of 
                                                          
9 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 14-05794 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016); 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016); ISCR Case No. 12-09545 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015). 
 
11 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05794 at 6 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (favorable decision reversed because 
judge did not adequately consider security concerns raised by applicant’s failure to withhold a sufficient 
amount in taxes from his wages over a period of four years and delay in addressing tax debt). 
 
12 SOR 2.a and 2.b. The SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the minor debts 
referenced in SOR 1.b and 1.c. The deliberate omission of any matter that needs to be reported on an SCA 
can potentially raise a security concern. ISCR Case No. 08-11944 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2011) (“Applicant 
appears to argue that the security significance of the falsifications derives from the security significance of 
the events that were the subject of the falsifications. This argument lacks merit. An act of falsification has 
security significance independent of any significance of the underlying conduct.”) Here, Applicant’s 
explanation for not listing these minor debts on the SCA was both plausible and credible. Thus, SOR 2.b is 
decided in his favor.  
 
7 
 
 
a security clearance application raises the personal conduct security concern, which is 
set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security 
clearance process. An applicant should disclose any potential derogatory information 
responsive to the questions asked on the SCA. However, the omission of material, 
adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant 
intentionally falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, 
or sincerely thought the information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge 
must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an 
applicant’s true intent.13 
 
 Applicant falsified his SCA when he deliberately omitted the negative financial 
information about his taxes and the sizeable judgment entered against him in 2010. In 
reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account Applicant’s age, educational 
background and work experience at the time he submitted the SCA. Additionally, at the 
time he filled out the SCA, Applicant was clearly aware about the significant 2010 
judgment and that he had not timely paid his taxes for several years. He was first made 
aware of the tax problem by his tax preparer in 2010 and every year thereafter the tax 
debt continued to grow. (Tr. 46-47, 73) The fact Applicant, through his own financial 
irresponsibility, was not aware of the scope or magnitude of the tax problem did not relieve 
him of the responsibility to report this information. Applicant, at a minimum, should have 
answered the relevant questions in the affirmative, which would have placed the 
Government on notice as to a potential issue involving his finances. Contrast with ISCR 
Case No. 15-03727 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2016) (error to find applicant falsified SCA simply 
because not aware of “financial status before completing the SCA.”) 
 
 Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 
16(a) applies.14 None of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17 apply. 
 
  
                                                          
13 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
14 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations . . . determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for nearly 30 years without apparent issue. 
He is working two jobs in an attempt to resolve his tax issues. Such evidence raises 
favorable inferences regarding his security worthiness. However, his tax-related financial 
problems stretch back at least 15 years. He has repeatedly failed to take corrective action 
to comply with his tax obligations and recently failed to reveal his tax problems on a 
security clearance application. Months after submitting his security clearance application, 
Applicant filed his 2014 tax year tax return and again did not pay his federal income taxes 
when due. As of the close of the record, his past-due federal tax debt stands at over 
$65,000 and he has an additional $15,000 in state tax liens that remain unresolved. This 
disqualifying information raises security concerns that are not outweighed by the 
favorable record evidence. Overall, Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and 
persuasion to continue his eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.i:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
