 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-07414 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 3, 2015. On 
June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on December 21, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. On February 27, 2017, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for March 27, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. I appended to the record a letter that Government sent to Applicant as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Government’s request for administrative notice of relevant 
facts about the Republic of India as HE II. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through D and F, which were admitted without objection. I sustained the 
Government’s objection to AE E and did not admit it into evidence. I admitted AE G over 
the Government’s objection. Two witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. Upon 
Applicant’s request, I left the record open until April 24, 2017. Applicant timely provided 
additional documents that I admitted as AE H through J without objection; thereupon, at 
Applicant’s request, I closed the record on April 13, 2017. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on April 4, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 56 years old and has been married for almost 15 years. He and his 
wife have a daughter, age 14. Applicant received his bachelor’s degree from a 
university in India in 1985 and his master’s degree from a university in the United States 
in 1989. Since then, Applicant has worked as an engineer for U.S. companies. He has 
been employed full time with his current federal-contractor employer for over three 
years. This is his first application for a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant was born in Kuwait and moved to India when he was eight years old. 
He immigrated to the United States in 1987, as a citizen of India, after he graduated 
college.3 In 2008, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen with his wife, a citizen of India 
by birth.4 Their daughter is U.S. citizen by birth. His wife’s parents are citizens and 
residents of the United States. 
 
Applicant has three brothers. Brother A is a citizen of the United States who has 
resided here for over 30 years. He is an engineer who works for a U.S. federal 
contractor. Brothers B and C are citizens and residents of India. Brother B manages his 
mother’s portfolio of land, with help from Brother C, and does some freelance sound 
engineering.5 Brother C was a manager of a food company but is now in between jobs.6 
He previously lived in the United States where he attained a master’s degree and 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer, SCA (GE 1), and the summary of his personal subject interview (GE 2). I 
considered that GE 2 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, at hearing, 
Applicant did not object to me considering it when offered the opportunity to do so, and he confirmed that 
it accurately summarized the facts as he recalled them from the interview. (Tr. at 23.)  
  
2 Tr. at 9. 
 
3 Tr. at 17 and 60. 
 
4 See also Tr. at 49, and 61-62. 
 
5 Tr. at 52. 
 
6 Tr. at 52-53. 
 
3 
 
worked as an engineer at the same company as Applicant.7 Applicant’s father passed 
away when he was in high school.8 His mother resides with Brother A in the United 
States.9 She has sponsored Brothers B and C for U.S. citizenship and their applications 
are pending.10 
 
Applicant communicates with Brothers B and C by phone approximately once 
every three to six months or once a week if his mother is there visiting.11 She visits 
about once a year.12 Applicant recently became aware that his name is included on a 
deed to a plot of land that his mother owns in India, worth approximately $82,000. She 
plans to give it to Brother C, who is in the process of coordinating the transfer.13 More 
recently, he has spoken with Brother C more frequently due to this deed issue.14 His 
mother also owns other land in India that she intends to transfer at some point to 
Brothers B and C.15 There was no evidence presented that Applicant’s name is on the 
deeds to this other land. 
 
Applicant remains in contact with former boarding school and college classmates 
who are citizens and residents of India. He communicates with most of them by email; 
some approximately once every six months, and some more or less often. He disclosed 
closer relationships with two of these friends on his SCA. He communicates with one 
weekly by email or telephone. He sees the other one about once a year in the United 
States and communicates with him by phone and electronically. Both are employed in 
the private sector.16 
 
Applicant last travelled to India in April 2006.17 He used an Indian passport that 
expired in April 2016. Applicant surrendered his inactive Indian passport and renounced 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 40, 53-54. The record does not state for how long Brother C lived and worked in the United States, 
but does state that he returned to India in 2004 (Tr. at 54.) 
 
8 Tr. at 17. 
 
9 Tr. at 50. 
 
10 Tr. at 47, 62-63. 
 
11 Tr. at 63-66. 
 
12 Tr. at 65. 
 
13 Tr. at 27-28, 46-47, 59-60. 
 
14 Tr. at 64-66. 
 
15 Tr. at 57-59, and 76-77. 
 
16 See also Tr. at 17, and 55-57. 
 
17 See also Tr. at 70. 
 
 
4 
 
his Indian citizenship in March 2017.18 Although he has not made any specific plans to 
do so, he is contemplating returning to India with his daughter who has never been.19  
 
Applicant has made the United States his home with his wife and daughter.20 He 
maintains assets in the United States totaling approximately $746,952, including 
substantial equity in his home, two retirement accounts, and a savings plan established 
for his daughter’s future education in the United States.21 He earns an annual salary of 
approximately $133,000.22  Applicant is highly regarded for both his character and work 
performance, including by a senior pastor of the church where he is an active member 
and volunteer.23 
 
Administrative Notice (Republic of India) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I 
have taken administrative notice the U.S. Government’s pronouncements concerning 
the Republic of India, as outlined in HE II and the documents appended thereto, 
including the following: 
 
 The 2000 and 2008 Annual Reports to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage identified India as being involved in 
economic collection and industrial espionage.  
 
 In June 2013, a member of parliament in India and a close advisor to a now-
deceased chief minister was among those indicted by the U.S. Department of 
Justice for allegedly soliciting bribes for himself and other government officials 
in India in return for approving licenses to mine titanium minerals. 
 
 India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities. Anti-Western 
terrorist groups active in India, some of which are on the U.S. government’s 
list of foreign terrorist organizations, include Islamist extremist groups Harkat-
ul-Jihad, Harakat ul-Mujahidin, Indian Myjahideen, Jaish-e-Mohammed, and 
Lashker-e Tayyiba. 
 
 The most significant human rights problems involve police and security force 
abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape; corruption remains 
                                                          
18 AE D, AE I, and Tr. at 66-67. I considered that the Consulate returned Applicant’s cancelled passport to 
him. However, because the passport is expired, his possession of it is not security significant. 
 
19 Tr. at 73. 
 
20 Tr. at 17 and 42. 
 
21 AE B, AE H; Tr. at 42, 50, 70-71, and 74. 
 
22 AE B; Tr. at 71. 
 
23 AE A, Tr. at 34-40, and 74-75. 
 
 
5 
 
widespread and contributed to ineffective responses to crimes, including 
those against women, children, and members of scheduled castes or tribes, 
and societal violence based on gender, religious affiliation, and caste or tribe.  
Other human rights problems include disappearances, hazardous prison 
conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial detention. A 
lack of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government persists, 
contributing to widespread impunity. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”24 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”25 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”27 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
                                                          
24 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
25 Egan at 527. 
 
26 Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
27 Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.28 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”29 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.30 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.31 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.32 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”33 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”34  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
                                                          
28 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
29 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
30 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
31 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
32 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
33 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
34 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
  
Applicant’s close ties to family and friends who are citizens and residents of India 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). A “heightened risk” is associated 
with India given the significant human rights and terrorism problems existent there, and 
its history of economic collection and industrial espionage. Since the plot of land in India 
that Applicant co-owns with his family was not alleged, I can consider it only for the 
purposes of evaluating mitigation. However, even if it was alleged, the land would not 
establish AG ¶ 7(e)35 given that its value is not substantial as compared to the value of 
Applicant’s U.S. assets. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
                                                          
35 AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-
owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 
8 
 
For the reasons set out in the discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), AG ¶ 8(a) is not 
established. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has resided in the United States for almost 30 
years. During that time, he attained his post-graduate degree from a U.S. university, 
met and married his wife of 15 years with whom he became a naturalized citizen, had a 
daughter who is being educated in the United States, accumulated significant U.S. 
assets, and remained gainfully employed by U.S. companies. Applicant’s mother, 
Brother A, and his wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the United States. While 
Applicant still has close ties to family and friends who are citizens and residents of India, 
his significant financial interests, future plans, and loyalties are in the United States. 
Therefore, I have no doubt that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) is established. The plot of land that Applicant co-owns with his family is 
nominal in value as compared to the significant assets that he owns in the United 
States.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis, and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant was candid, sincere, and 
credible at the hearing. He is highly regarded for his character and work performance. I 
do not doubt that his allegiance is with the United States, where he has made his home. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person and the “heightened risk” 
associated with India, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his ties to India. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
