1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-08044 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Raymond W. Fraley, Jr. Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond his control and 
he has acted responsibly in addressing them.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On August 4, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 
 
 On April 20, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 I received this case on September 26, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on November 17, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3.3 Applicant testified in his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - F. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 28, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $23,539 for two 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a and 1.b). In response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted both allegations, and he provided remarks and explanations along with his 
responses. In addition to the facts established by the pleadings, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He has worked for his current employer since January 
2005 and has an excellent record of performance there. He served in the United States 
Navy as an electronics technician from August 1989 until August 1993, and from May 
1996 until May 2000. He received honorable discharges after both enlistments. Applicant 
has held an industrial security clearance since February 2006. (Gx. 1; Tr. 24, 41 - 42) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since August 2013. A previous marriage 
began in May 2003, but ended in divorce in June 2011 after a separation that began in 
October 2010. Applicant and his ex-wife share custody of their 11-year-old child from that 
marriage. Applicant lives with his current wife and her four children (ages 12 – 18) from a 
previous marriage. (Answer; Gx. 1; Ax. A; Ax. F; Tr. 22 - 23) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant and his first wife bought a house for about $88,000. Working 
with a real estate agent, they put the house on the market for sale in 2009. As it turned 
out, one of the terms of their divorce in 2011 was that they sell the house and split the 
proceeds. However, the value of the house had dropped by then. A tree fell on the house 
in April 2011 and severely damaged it, delaying any possible sale of the house until 
repairs were complete in October 2011. In May 2012, Applicant and his real estate agent 
decided to rent the house to a couple who eventually wanted to buy the property. 
Applicant was able to cover his mortgage until October 2013. At that time, the renters 
                                                 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s letter forwarding Gx. 1- 3 to Applicant in advance of hearing is included 
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
3 
 
broke the lease and abandoned the home without further payments. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 
2; Tr. 32, 34, 42) 
 
 In August 2013, after Applicant remarried, he, his new wife, and her four children 
rented a home. He was able to meet all of his financial obligations as long as his other 
house had renters. Applicant’s wife had been receiving public assistance for food when 
she was a single mother. She lost that assistance when she married Applicant, thereby 
adding about $800 to Applicant’s monthly expenses. In addition, car repairs and other 
unforeseen expenses in 2013 strained Applicant’s finances. When the renters abandoned 
Applicant’s house, he quickly fell behind on his mortgage payments. He and his real 
estate agent then tried to negotiate a short sale of the house. Applicant averred that three 
such sales were agreed to, but owing to the length of time the lender took to approve any 
such sale, each buyer eventually withdrew. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 25 – 27, 31 – 35) 
 
 Applicant last made a mortgage payment in October 2013. The resulting debt, 
$13,203 past due on a balance of $69,544, is alleged at SOR 1.b. The mortgage lender 
subsequently foreclosed and, in January 2016, sold the house at auction for $55,282. The 
balance remaining on the mortgage before foreclosure was about $69,500. As of the 
hearing, Applicant had not received any claim for the remaining deficiency after resale. 
He also had not received an IRS Form 1099 indicating that the deficiency might be 
attributed to Applicant as reportable income. Applicant recently consulted with a financial 
professional who advised that, based on Applicant’s current income and expenses, he 
would not be required to satisfy the deficiency either directly or as reported income for tax 
purposes.4 On October 5, 2016, the lender indicated “there is no principal balance that is 
associated with this account and nothing for us to collect on.” (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. D; 
Tr. 34, 41 – 43) 
 
 In August 2007, Applicant and his ex-wife also opened a $27,000 line of credit to 
make repairs and improvements to their house. They also used the money to pay off a 
car loan and other bills. Applicant defaulted on the loan in June 2015 after paying it down 
to the $10,336 delinquency alleged at SOR 1.a. In September 2016, Applicant was able, 
after repaying other debts not alleged in the SOR, to enter into a repayment agreement 
with this creditor whereby he pays $200 each month for 36 months to settle the debt. 
(Answer; Gx. 1 – 3; Ax. E; Tr. 27 – 29, 36) 
 
 Applicant has no other delinquent or past-due debts. In addition to disclosing the 
SOR 1.a and 1.b debts in his e-QIP, Applicant also disclosed other bad debts that he had 
already paid off. He presented a budget showing that he has a modest net monthly 
remainder after expenses. His expenses include regular payments to the SOR 1.a debt, 
support for the child from his first marriage, and other regular obligations. Applicant and 
his wife live well within their means, relying almost exclusively on Applicant’s income. 
Applicant and his wife would like to purchase a house, but he understands that he must 
finish resolving his past-due debts and save for a down payment before that can happen. 
(Ax.B; Tr. 29, 38 - 40) 
 
                                                 
4 The state where the foreclosure occurred allows lenders to sue for post-foreclosure deficiencies. 
4 
 
 Applicant has an excellent reputation in his community and at work. He is active in 
his church and volunteers in a various capacities. His work evaluations reflect consistently 
superior performance and regular pay increases over the past ten years. (Ax. A; Ax. F) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to 
the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one 
has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.7 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 
 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the SOR allegations  
under this guideline. The facts thus established reasonably raise a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy   debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income 
is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant lost his house to foreclosure after he 
stopped paying his mortgage in late 2013. He also defaulted on a line of credit in June 
2015. At the time the SOR was issued, the debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b were still being 
reported as delinquent.  
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control. 
 
                                                 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
6 
 
 Applicant established that he incurred the SOR 1.a and 1.b debts through 
circumstances beyond his control. As to the SOR 1.a debt, Applicant had been repaying 
that loan as required for several years before defaulting in 2015. He has established a 
payment plan that will resolve the debt in the reasonably near future. After putting his 
house on the market without success in 2009, the terms of his divorce precluded him from 
retaining the house after the marriage ended. Yet the real estate market declined and 
Applicant was not able to sell the house. He finally became unable to pay the mortgage 
after he remarried and the tenants renting his house abandoned the lease. Subsequently, 
multiple attempts to resolve the mortgage through short sale failed and the lender 
foreclosed. Available information shows that Applicant has no remaining obligation to the 
mortgage lender, as alleged in SOR 1.b. The record as a whole shows that Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 As to Applicant’s current finances, he and his wife manage their finances in a 
prudent manner and are unlikely to incur new delinquencies. Applicant had already been 
resolving other debts not at issue here, but as explained, above, had not yet resolved the 
two debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant and his wife live within their means and 
understand the importance of resolving their debts before they embark on new 
acquisitions, such as a new car or a house. On balance, AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(c) apply and 
the security concerns under this guideline are mitigated. I also have evaluated this record 
in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has an excellent 
record in the workplace. He also is active in his community and his church. He has 
addressed his debts in a responsible manner over the past several years. A fair and 
commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows that Applicant’s 
financial problems are not reflective of poor judgment or a lack of trustworthiness. The 
security concerns raised by the Government’s information have been mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
