 
1 
 
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03557 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant has not resolved his tax issues or delinquent debts, thus he 
has failed to mitigate the concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 12, 2013. 
On December 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on May 4, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 13, 2016, and 
the case was assigned to me on August 3, 2016. On August 24, 2016, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
 
2 
 
September 15, 2016 at 1:00 p.m. After consulting with Applicant, DOHA issued an 
amended notice of hearing for September 15, 2016 at 8:30 a.m.  I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which I admitted 
over Department Counsel’s objection. Applicant brought original documents, which I 
marked for the record as AX B through E, but did not admit. I kept the record open until 
September 29, 2016, to enable him to submit copies of AX B through E as he agreed, 
and any additional documentary evidence. He did not submit copies of AX B through E 
and I did not admit them. On October 5, 2016, I received two additional exhibits from 
Applicant (AX F and G). I reopened the record and admitted AX F and G without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 23, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file and pay his 2006 through 2010 
Federal income taxes as required and nine delinquent debts totaling $7,032. In his 
Answer, Applicant denied the tax allegation and stated that he had filed his tax returns. 
He admitted four of the debts, denied five of the debts, and stated that he paid SOR debt 
1.e, and that SOR debt 1.i was inaccurate. Applicant’s admissions in his Answer are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. The debts are corroborated by the November 2015, 
March 2015, and February 2013 credit bureau reports (CBR). (GX 4; GX 3; GX 2.)  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old security officer employed by a defense contractor since 
May 2012. He served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Army from April 1989 until 
February 1997 and from October 1999 until he retired in October 2011. He was deployed 
in Iraq in 2003, and served in the first Gulf War. (GX 1; AX G.) This is his first application 
for a security clearance. He received a high school equivalency degree in 1988. He and 
his first wife married in October 2010 and divorced in April 2011. He and his current wife 
married in July 2011. Applicant has an adult son who resides with him and a 13-year-old 
daughter who does not. (GX 1.) 
 
Between 2006 and 2011, Applicant was stationed in South Korea. He did not file 
or pay Federal taxes during this time. He was erroneously told by his first sergeant that 
he was not required to because South Korea is in a war zone. (Tr. 24.) He prepared his 
2012 Federal tax return using computer software, discovered that he owed taxes, and did 
not file his return. Several months later, he received a letter from the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) stating that he owed delinquent taxes. He did not take any action at that 
time. (Tr. 24-27.) Applicant did not timely file his Federal tax returns for 2013, 2014, or 
2015. It was not until he spoke with Department Counsel about scheduling his hearing 
that Applicant realized that his failure to file and pay his taxes and resolve his other 
delinquent debts was “this serious.” (Tr. 25-26.)  
Applicant filed his Federal tax returns for 2006 through 2015 on July 28, 2016. He owes 
$31,221 in taxes and penalties. (Tr. 33-37; AX F.) He filled out, signed, and submitted via 
facsimile a direct debit installment agreement for tax years 2005 through 2015 with the 
IRS on October 5, 2016. However, the document is not filled out correctly. Specifically, 
on the line where Applicant was supposed to enter the amount of his initial payment, he 
 
3 
 
reentered the total amount he owes. He then agreed to monthly installments of $400 a 
month beginning in October 2016, and $485 a month beginning in December 2017. (AX 
F.) Clearly, Applicant was not agreeing to pay the total balance due up front, followed by 
ongoing monthly installments. Applicant did not provide a corrected or final agreement 
with the IRS nor any record of payment. Applicant has not filed or paid his state taxes for 
2006 through 2015, because he was unaware that he was required to do so. (Tr. 37-39; 
Tr. 58.) 
Applicant testified that his transition from military life to civilian life was difficult and 
resulted in his incurring delinquent debt. He stated that that he recently contacted several 
credit bureaus and disputed some of the accounts on his CBRs, but did not provide any 
documentation or additional testimony in support of this statement. (Tr. 26.)  
 
Applicant has not paid: the $531 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b); the $478 and $2,519 credit-
card debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, and 1.h). He does not recognize the $505 credit-card debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d and has not paid it. (Tr. 41-43.) He denies owing the $365 utility debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g, stating that he never lived at the address where the charges were incurred. 
He informed the utility company of his dispute with this account, and was told he needed 
to provide evidence to support his claim. He has not done so. (Tr. 44-45.) Applicant 
disputes owing the $2,209 cell phone account debt. (SOR ¶ 1.i.) He explained that he 
incurred roaming charges while stationed in South Korea because his cell phone 
continued to receive incoming calls. He thinks that because he was not informed by the 
cell phone service provider about the charges he was incurring, he is not responsible for 
paying the debt. (Tr. 45-47.)    
 
Applicant testified that he paid the $51 medical debt (SOR ¶1.c), the $240 cable 
bill (SOR ¶ e), and the $134 vehicle insurance debt (SOR ¶ 1.j.) He stated that he knows 
he paid the cable bill because he currently has cable service with the same company. (Tr. 
43-44.) He did not provide any documentary evidence of payment of any of these debts. 
He stated that he intends to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.h, which total 
$3,528. (Tr. 42-46.) Applicant earns $25 an hour, with variable overtime pay. In 2015, he 
earned approximately $48,000. (Tr. 48-49.)  He also receives monthly retirement pay and 
disability benefits. (AX G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
 
4 
 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 
19(g) (“failure to annual . . . tax returns as required”). The following mitigating conditions 
under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing, of his own making, and raise 
questions about his judgment. Applicant erroneously thought he was not required to file 
or pay taxes while he was stationed in South Korea from 2006 until 2011. However, he 
actively decided not to file his 2012 Federal tax return because he owed money. After 
receiving notice from the IRS that he owed unpaid taxes, he failed to file his 2013, 2014, 
and 2015 Federal tax returns. He received the SOR in December 2015, but did not take 
any action concerning his unfiled, unpaid taxes and other delinquent debts until July 2016. 
He owes over $31,000 in delinquent Federal taxes.  
 
While Applicant’s transition from military life to civilian life may have indeed been 
difficult, it does not excuse his overall failure to take control of his finances. Applicant did 
not provide any evidence of payment of any of the SOR debts. He did not submit copies 
of his exhibits as he agreed to do at the hearing. The installment agreement with the IRS 
that Applicant submitted is necessarily void on its face. He did not follow up on the dispute 
with the utility company, and his dispute with the cell phone provider is unfounded. None 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant’s military career is commendable. However, through mistake, intention, 
or indifference, Applicant failed to resolve his financial issues. His substantial tax debt, 
multiple years of failing to file his tax returns, and unawareness of his state tax obligations 
continue to raise concerns. His overall inaction to take control of his finances is not 
 
7 
 
conduct consistent with the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of 
those granted access to classified information.  
   
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
