 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02981 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 17, 2016. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-9 (Items 1 and 2 are pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received it on May 26, 
2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She failed to submit any documentary evidence or 
object to the Government’s evidence. Items 3-9 are admitted into evidence. The case 
was assigned to me on March 24, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations with 
explanations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of 
the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She is single and has two children. She has worked for 
a federal contractor since January 1995. She has a high school diploma.1  
  
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file her 2012 and 2103 federal income tax 
returns, had a vehicle of an unstated value repossessed, and has three delinquent 
debts totaling approximately $228. Applicant stated the reason for her financial 
difficulties was because her children’s father passed away in 2012 and she had to 
handle his affairs. She failed to file her 2012 and 2013 federal tax returns because of 
this. In her SOR answer she stated she filed both years’ returns and was making 
monthly tax payments. She failed to supply supporting documentation.2  
 
 Applicant admitted her car was repossessed for nonpayment, and that she 
incurred two medical debts and a consumer debt, which were all delinquent. She claims 
her wages were garnished to pay for the repossession charges, but she failed to 
provide supporting documentation. With the three remaining delinquent debts, she 
claims she was never contacted to make payments and they were taken off her credit 
report. She provided no supporting documentation. All these debts are unresolved. The 
debts are supported by credit reports from May 2013, May 2014, November 2014, and 
March 2016, and by Applicant’s admissions.3 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about her current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that she sought financial counseling.4 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 7. 
 
2 Items 2, 5, 7. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-9. 
 
4 Items 2, 4-9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file Federal, state . . . income tax returns as required . . . . 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. She also failed 
to file her federal income tax returns for 2012 and 2013. I find all the disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant’s children’s father’s death was a circumstance beyond her 
control. She did not present sufficient evidence to show responsible action to address 
the debts. To date, there is no documentation supporting payment of the debts or the 
filing of her 2012 or 2013 federal tax returns. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do 
not apply. She also failed to document any dispute of the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not shown a track 
record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
