 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 15-04476 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelly, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Curry, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
 
Given the amount of Applicant’s current alcohol consumption and the frequency of 
his alcohol-related criminal conduct, it is too soon to conclude that he has mitigated the 
security concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under 
Guideline G (alcohol consumption) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 2, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, denying all of the allegations 
except subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e. He requested a hearing, and on December 6 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On 
February 9, 2017, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, setting the hearing for February 
27, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. As a preliminary matter, the Government 
withdrew Paragraph 2 of the SOR, which contained the alleged security concerns 
pertaining to personal conduct. (Transcript (Tr.) at 7) I received four Government exhibits 
 
2 
(GE 1 - 4), and I considered Applicant’s testimony. I received the Tr. of the hearing on 
March 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old married man with two adult children. He is a high school 
graduate who served in the U.S. Navy on active duty from 1984 through 1989, and in the 
active reserve from 1988 to 1999. He was honorably discharged. (Tr. 15) Since August 
2008, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor in the information technology field. 
Currently, he is a senior professional engineer. (Tr. 15) He has held a top secret clearance 
since 1984. 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related misconduct. In October 2007, he was 
arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) after a police officer 
stopped him after observing his car weaving from lane to lane. Subsequently, the court 
fined Applicant $630 and required him to take a driving education course. (GE 2 at 4) 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant was stopped by a police officer who suspected that 
he was driving while under the influence of alcohol. Because the Applicant was close to 
his home, the police officer allowed him to park the vehicle and walk home, rather than 
administer a roadside sobriety test. (Tr. 33) Applicant was, however, charged with 
reckless driving and fined $510. 
 
 In March 2011, Applicant was arrested after being charged with possession of drug 
paraphernalia and open container. Immediately before the arrest, Applicant had been 
drinking beer with friends in the courtyard of an apartment complex that he managed for 
his mother, who owned it. When he walked across the street to his car to retrieve a pack 
of cigarettes, a police officer stopped him. Applicant admits having an open beer in his 
hand, but does not admit possessing any drug paraphernalia. (Tr. 18) The charges were 
later dropped. (Tr. 19) As a result of this incident, Applicant was suspended from his then-
job for four weeks. (Tr. 33) 
 
 One afternoon in November 2013, Applicant drank a six-pack of beer. That 
evening, he decided to visit a friend. Contrary to his wife’s advice, he drove to his friend’s 
house. While at the friend’s home, Applicant drank a pint of liquor. While driving home, 
Applicant was stopped by the police and charged with the following: 1) possession of 
open container of alcohol in a vehicle; 2) operating a vehicle while impaired; 3) DUI; and 
4) driving without a permit. (Answer at 1) His blood/alcohol content at the time of the arrest 
was approximately .20 percent. (Tr. 28) Subsequently, Counts 1 and 3 were dropped, 
and Applicant was sentenced to 210 days incarceration, with all but ten days suspended, 
ordered to pay a fine, and ordered to complete probation through July 2015. (GE 2 at 4; 
Tr. 17)  As part of Applicant’s probation, he had to take an alcohol education course. (Tr. 
18) Applicant successfully completed the probation requirements. 
 
 As of January 2015, Applicant was drinking approximately 12 beers every 
weekend. As of the hearing date, he has been drinking six beers every weekend. He has 
 
3 
never been diagnosed or evaluated as either alcohol dependent or alcohol abusive. (Tr. 
39)  
 
Applicant testified that he gained an increased understanding, through his alcohol 
education classes, of the harm that alcohol abuse can cause, and the danger that driving 
while intoxicated can pose to others. (Tr. 3) He still keeps in touch with the counselors at 
the alcohol education center. (Tr. 39) 
 
 Applicant is active in his community, participating in a charitable organization that 
feeds the homeless and distributes holiday meals to the needy. Occasionally, Applicant 
will grocery shop for neighborhood senior citizens. (Tr. 35) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under this guideline, “excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise 
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.” Applicant’s history of alcohol-related 
arrests and citations triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents 
away from work, such as driving while under the influence . . . or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent,” and 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent.” 
 
 
5 
  The potentially applicable mitigating conditions are set for in AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 
23(b), as follows: 
 
a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 In the context of Applicant’s entire adult life, his episodes of alcohol-related 
misconduct have been infrequent. Conversely, they have all occurred within the past ten 
years, which is more troubling than if they had occurred long ago when he was in his late 
teens to early twenties. Moreover, by 2011 Applicant was acutely aware of the negative 
career consequences that alcohol abuse can pose, as his arrest that year prompted his 
employer to suspend him. Yet, he was arrested again, charged with DUI, and ultimately 
convicted, less than three years later. (subparagraph 1.b).  
 
 As recently as January 2015, Applicant was drinking 12 beers per week. This 
amount of alcohol consumption, less than two years after an alcohol-related conviction 
resulted in prison time and probation, undermines his testimony that he internalized the 
lessons taught during his alcohol education classes, taken as part of his probation 
requirements.   
 
 In sum, Applicant is a civic-minded individual who has a history of volunteering in 
his community. He is a veteran who has held a security clearance for more then 30 years. 
However, his current alcohol consumption is too high, given the recency and frequency 
of his alcohol-related criminal episodes, for either AG ¶ 23(a) or AG ¶ 23(b) to apply. 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the alcohol consumption security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required 
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:      WITHDRAWN  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
