 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03265 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 5, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 13, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 25, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He 
responded to the FORM on June 8, 2016. The case was assigned to me on February 
16, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-6.1 FORM Item 3 
consists of two unauthenticated summaries of interviews with a government investigator 
conducted on November 18, 2012 and February 25, 2013. In the FORM, Department 
Counsel advised Applicant that he could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be 
admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the 
document to make it accurate.  Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the 
FORM or to raise any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence 
would be considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM, he made some 
corrections to the interview summaries, and he raised no objections. Given Department 
Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s corrections, I find his waiver to be knowing and 
intelligent.2 FORM Items 2-6 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 2-6, 
without objection. 
 
In his FORM response, Applicant submitted four documents, including a full copy 
of Department Counsel’s FORM with corrections to FORM Item 3. I admitted these four 
documents into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 27 debts. Applicant admitted all of the debts, except for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.j., and 1.y., which he denied. He also claimed to have 
paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.q., 1.r., 1.s., 1.t., and 1.u. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school in 1983. He has been 
married since 1986, and he has seven children, ranging in age from17 to 34. From April 
1996 to April 2008, he was employed by a federal contractor. He was terminated in April 
2008 following three policy violations within a 12-month period. He remained 
unemployed (except for a brief construction job) until June 2009.  From June 2009 to 
February 2012, he was employed full time by private companies. In February 2012, he 
was rehired by the federal contractor for whom he was previously employed.3 
 
 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR, which are pleadings and are 
entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s August 2012 and March 2015 credit reports establish the 27 alleged 
debts, which became delinquent between 2006 and 2012: 
 
SOR ¶ Creditor Balance Answer Evidence 
1.a. Credit Card $536 Denies GE 4; GE 5 
1.b. Medical $280 Admits GE 4 
1.c. Credit Card N/A Admits GE 4 
1.d. Judgment $3,871 Admits GE 4 
1.e. Collection $134 Admits GE 4 
1.f. Collection $232 Admits GE 4 
1.g. Collection $671 Admits GE 4 
1.h. Collection $637 Admits GE 4 
1.i. Collection $90 Admits GE 4 
1.j. Collection $6,876 Denies GE 4 
1.k. Collection $419 Admits GE 4 
1.l. Collection $653 Admits GE 4 
1.m. Collection $371 Admits GE 4 
1.n. Collection $1,006 Admits GE 4 
1.o. Collection $426 Admits GE 4 
1.p. Collection $867 Admits GE 4 
1.q. Credit Card $286 Admits GE 4 
1.r. Collection $1,229 Admits GE 4 
1.s. Collection $145 Admits GE 4 
1.t. Collection $147 Admits GE 4 
1.u. Collection $167 Admits GE 4 
1.v. Medical $46 Admits GE 4 
1.w. Medical $569 Admits GE 4 
1.x. Collection $2,539 Admits GE 4 
1.y. Collection $150 Denies GE 4 
1.z. Collection $278 Admits GE 4 
1.aa. Collection $71 Admits GE 4 
 
 Although Applicant claimed to have paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.q., 1.r., 1.s., 
1.t., and 1.v., he only provided documentation showing that the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
was satisfied. In his responses to the SOR and FORM, he also claims to be arranging 
payment plans on SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., 1.v., and 1.w., but he provided no corroborating 
documentation. He disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.y., and 1.aa. However, he 
provided no documentation to substantiate his disputes.4 During his November 2012 
security interview, he admitted that his wife did have a delinquent account with the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.y.5 
 
                                                          
4 Applicant provided AE B, but this document does not clearly show that he is not liable on the debt in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.aa. 
 
5 Response to SOR; AE A; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his loss of employment in 2008. He 
acknowledged that his rules violations triggered his termination.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
6 Response to SOR; AE A; GE 3. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s 27 delinquent debts total approximately $22,606. These debts 
became delinquent between 2006 and 2012. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has paid one debt (SOR ¶ 1.d), but he has taken no steps to resolve 
any of the remaining 26 delinquent debts. Applicant’s financial struggles date from 
before 2006 and are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.8 Although Applicant’s rules violations caused his 
unemployment in 2008, his inability to find gainful employment for over a year 
constitutes a circumstance beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.9 Applicant paid one debt (SOR ¶ 1.d.); however, there is no 
documentation of any steps taken to resolve or payments made on the remaining 26 
delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant acted 
responsibly to address his delinquent debts or to develop and implement a reasonable 
debt repayment plan.  AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling or of a monthly budget to 
conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”10 
Applicant paid one debt (SOR ¶ 1.d.), but there is no documentation of any further debt-
resolution efforts. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
To the extent Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.y., and 1.aa., he has 
not provided any documentation to demonstrate a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of these debts. He provided a handwritten notation stating that the $71 
parking ticket (SOR ¶ 1.aa.) “will be off credit report,” but this documentation does not 
substantiate a basis for dispute. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Absent evidence of 
debt repayment and financial responsibility, I find that security concerns about 
Applicant’s financial problems remain. 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s unemployment contributed to his financial delinquencies. 
Nonetheless, he bears the burden to demonstrate that he was financially responsible 
under the circumstances. Beyond the payment of one debt, there is no evidence of 
good-faith efforts to repay or resolve his delinquent debts or evidence that he meets his 
current financial obligations. As a result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e.-1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
