 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-02200 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of failure to fully pay his Federal income taxes. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 30, 2014. On August 
5, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on September 16, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
October 25, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing on November 2, 2016, setting the hearing date for December 6, 2016, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The record was left open 
for receipt of additional documents until March 1, 2017. On February 28, 2017, Applicant 
submitted AE C through AE Q. Department Counsel had no objections to AE C through 
AE Q, and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked 
since August 1999. He has held a security clearance since 2002, without violation. He is 
a high school graduate. He is not married, but has one child, age 11. (GE 1; Tr. 22-26.) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with 
clarifications. Applicant’s admissions and explanations are incorporated into the following 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the amount of 
approximately $11,085 for tax year 2010, and $11,565 for tax year 2012. He filed his tax 
returns, as required by law, but was unable to afford to pay his tax obligations for 2010 
and 2012 due to his high child support payments and his mortgage payments at that time. 
He testified that he owed on his state taxes too, but has paid off that debt. (GE 2; Tr. 28-
30.) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant had a payment agreement with the IRS to withdraw monthly 
payments from his credit card to resolve his 2010 Federal tax debt. However, in 
September 2013, Applicant’s credit card expired, and payments were no longer 
automatically charged to his account. Applicant claimed he had no idea that his monthly 
payments to the IRS were not being made until receiving notification from the DoD during 
his security investigation. He is now pending an installment agreement with the IRS to 
resolve his 2010 and 2012 Federal tax obligations. Applicant’s Federal tax refunds were 
used to offset his Federal tax debt in 2013, 2014, and 2015. However, he owes a total of 
approximately $23,520 on his Federal tax debts for 2010 and 2012. He submitted a 
payment of an undisclosed amount on September 20, 2016, along with an offer in 
compromise. That offer was rejected by the IRS because the monthly payment amount 
was too low. He resubmitted a second offer in compromise in November 2016, with a 
payment of $454, which was the monthly payment amount requested by the IRS. He 
plans on continuing to make monthly payments of $454 until this debt is resolved. (AE A; 
AE F; AE H; Tr. 31-36.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s salary was approximately $122,000 in 2016. (AE Q.) His October 2016 
credit report reflected a resolved state tax lien and two paid collections accounts. 
Applicant’s state tax obligation was resolved, in part, through a withholding order from the 
state court. (GE 3.) All other accounts were in good standing. (GE 8.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility dating back at least to 2010, and 
continuing to date with respect to his substantial delinquent Federal tax debt. Despite 
working full-time for his current employer since 1999, he remains without means to repay 
his substantial delinquent tax debt. His financial history and ongoing pattern of inability or 
unwillingness to pay his debts raise security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 Applicant’s financial problems are extensive, ongoing, and arose from voluntary 
choices on his part. They continue to reflect irresponsibility, unreliability, and poor 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not provide mitigation of the security concerns. There 
is insufficient evidence that he participated in effective financial counseling or that his 
financial problems are under control. While he made regular payments on his tax debts 
from 2011 to 2013, he stopped, and has only recently begun to make monthly payments 
again. He did not demonstrate a good-faith effort to repay the IRS. Applicant did not 
dispute the legitimacy of his delinquent debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
 
6 
 
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns expressed 
in the SOR, including failure to pay required income taxes. The alleged incidents of 
financial concern started in 2010 and remain ongoing. He did not establish a track record 
of recent payments to resolve his Federal tax debt. The likelihood that similar problems 
will recur remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress 
is undiminished. He has a lengthy history of financial irresponsibility. Overall, the record 
evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
