                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-05622     
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated February 24, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. A notice of
hearing, dated January 9, 2017, was issued, scheduling the hearing for February 23,
2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into the record. Applicant submitted
Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-G. I held the record open until March 2, 2017. Applicant 
submitted an additional document, which was marked as AX H, and entered into the
1
record without objection. He testified, but did not present witnesses. The transcript was
received on March 2, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and provided detailed explanations for
each allegation.
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In 2013, he
married, but he is now separated. He has no children. (Tr. 33) Applicant received his
undergraduate degree in 2004. (GX 2) He has worked for his current employer since
2009. (GX 1) He has held a security clearance since 2009. He completed his most
recent security clearance application in 2014. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts, including three judgments, which total
about $34,000 and a collection account in the amount of $842. (GX 3) Applicant
explained that he has paid other debts that are not on the SOR. ( GX 2;Tr. 17; AX E) In
2013, he settled an account.  (Tr. 19) He received a form 1099-C for another account.
(AX G)
As to SOR allegation 1.a, a 2011 judgment filed in the amount of $11,958,
Applicant is in a repayment plan (AX A). (Tr. 24 ) He makes a monthly payment of $50.
His first payment was in January of this year. However, he will renegotiate in a year to
increase the payment amount. The judgement is the result of a home that Applicant
and his friend purchased. In 2006, when his girlfriend left the home, he could not
maintain the payments on one income. He used credit cards to pay his bills for the
home and for any repairs that were required.  (Tr.21) Applicant testified credibly that he
did not know about this judgment until his investigative interview in 2015. (Tr. 44)
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant admits the debt of $4,927. He has been
paying $100 monthly. (AX B)  He settled the debt for about $1,100 (Tr.16) He started
payments in late 2014. This is the result of a line of credit. (Tr.29)
As to the SOR allegation in 1.c, a 2011 judgment in the amount of $17,580.00,
Applicant provided a payment history showing payments since 2010.  (AX C) This is a
result of a short sale. Applicant stated that he had to pay $10,000 for a service fee. (Tr.
43)  (AX C) It is unclear whether Applicant understood or was taken advantage of due
to English as a second language.
As to the allegation in SOR 1.d, a collection account in the amount of $841,
Applicant provided documentation that he settled the debt in 2013. (AX D)
2
Applicant’s annual salary in 2011 was about $40,000. (Tr. 26) In 2013,
Applicant’s annual salary was about $60,000. (Tr. 32) He now earns $75,000 a year. He
has no other delinquent debt. His car is paid in full. (Tr. 35) He believes his monthly net
remainder is $1,500 a month. (Tr. 35) He has a 401(k) account that he recently started.
He is current on his student loans. (Tr. 49) He uses one credit card and pays the
balance each month. He has a savings and checking account. He has not sought
financial counseling. Applicant lives with his parents. He stated that although he does
not have a formal budget, he makes a list of his expenses each month. (Tr.50)
Applicant stated that he can continue with his payment plans and that is his intention.
Applicant was emphatic that he has not neglected his finances. He disclosed in detail
other accounts on his security clearance application. (GX 1)
Applicant submitted a letter of reference as a post-hearing submission. The
Director of the contracts department stated that Applicant has been a valuable
employee for eight years.  Clients have praised his knowledge and expertise.  He is
honest, dependable, and hard-working.  Applicant is a team player. (AX H)
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance1
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
The Government produced sufficient evidence to show that Applicant accrued
delinquent debts and judgements. Applicant admitted the debts and judgments.
Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
5
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant’s current financial difficulties began in 2006 when his friend left the
home that they were in together. He could not afford the mortgage. He used credit cards
to pay for almost everything.  A judgment was entered in 2011, which Applicant stated
he had no knowledge of until his investigative interview.  He produced evidence that he
has a payment plan for his debts and resolved other non-SOR debts. One SOR debt
was settled in 2013. Applicant supplemented the record with a letter of recommendation.
He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b) due to the circumstances beyond his control 
although he could have been more aggressive, I believe he acted responsibly given his
understanding of the issues. He did not obtain counseling.  He receives partial credit
under AG 20(d) as the payment plans are in existence and he has the resources to
continue the plan. The other mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant presented
sufficient evidence in this case to meet his burden. He mitigated the financial security
concerns.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He now lives with his parents. He has had a clearance
without incidents since 2009. He is recommended for his reliability and hard work. He
bought a home with his girlfriend, and when she left, he could not afford to maintain the
mortgage and other expenses. He paid other non-SOR debts. He remarried, but
separated. He alone is making payments on the judgments. He was credible in that he
did not know about the one judgment until the investigative interview in 2015. English is
his second language and he tried hard to understand the short sale of the home and
paid a $10,000 service fee. This appears to be quite high. He has not neglected his
debts.
 
 Applicant is in a steady position and is now saving money and paying his bills.
He has no car payment. He is not living above his means. He is living with his parents.
He was credible with his statements that he will continue with his payment plans. One
debt is resolved on the SOR. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions
or doubts as to his judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and eligibility for his security
clearance. I conclude that Applicant  presented sufficient evidence of mitigation of his
financial considerations security concern.
. Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1d: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is
granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
8
