 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06530 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that began prior to 2015 when she 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and also had unpaid student loans. She failed to mitigate 
the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On June 19, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 28, 2016, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
On March 28, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On April 18, 
2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items, and mailed it to Applicant the same day. Applicant received the FORM on 
April 28, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant did not submit any additional documents or file objections to the 
Government’s evidence; hence, Items 2 through 7 are admitted into evidence. On 
March 20, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the 
case to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged nine delinquent student loans and a 2015 Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy. Applicant admitted all ten allegations. (Item 2.) Her admissions are 
incorporated into these findings. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and married. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 1993 
and a master’s degree in 2012. She has worked for her current employer since 
September 2013. Prior to that, she worked for a private company for seven months. She 
worked for the Federal government from January 2009 to June 2011. In the past 10 
years, she was unemployed 2 months in 2007, 7 months in 2008, and 25 months 
between 2011 and 2013. (Item 3.)   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from June 2014 and April 2015, the 
February 2016 SOR alleged nine student loans that became delinquent between 2013 
and 2014. The delinquent balance owed for the loans at the time the SOR issued was 
$4,366. The total balance owed for those nine loans is $75,390. The SOR also alleged 
that in April 2015, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and it was discharged in August 
2015.1 (Items 5, 6, 7.)  
 
 In July 2015, Applicant completed financial interrogatories. In response to 
questions about the status of her delinquent student loans, she wrote, “Attempting to 
rehabilitate. Cannot make arrangements until bankruptcy discharged.” (Item 4.)  
 
 In her March 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that she was “not done paying for 
the bankruptcy proceedings,” and thus was unable to resolve her student loans. She 
indicated that she intended to resolve them. (Item 2.) 
 
 The Government notified Applicant in its April 2016 FORM, that she had not 
submitted evidence documenting actions she had taken to resolve her student loans. It 
stated that she had 30 days in which to submit information. She did not file any 
additional information. 
 
                                                          
1The record does not contain evidence documenting the total amount of delinquent debt contained in the 
bankruptcy discharge. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not submit documentation that she obtained credit or financial 
counseling beyond the mandatory counseling required for bankruptcy filing, or sought 
assistance for addressing and managing her student loans. Her budget lists her monthly 
income as $1,040, and expenses of $1,400, indicating a shortage of $400. (Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DOD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DOD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy financial obligations, 
which began before she filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 2015, and continues to date. 
The evidence raises both disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under any of the above 
mitigating conditions. Applicant failed to demonstrate that her ongoing delinquent 
student loans are unlikely to continue or recur, or that her reliability and trustworthiness 
is not in question. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. She provided some evidence that her 
financial delinquencies may have occurred as the result of a period of unemployment 
over several years, which may have been a circumstance beyond her control. She did 
not present evidence that she attempted to manage her debts and student loans during 
those times. Thus, the evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling beyond the mandatory counseling required for filing bankruptcy, or that she 
developed a reliable plan to resolve the debts. Rather, the record indicates that she 
does not have the ability to address her debts. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. She did not 
submit evidence that she made a good-faith effort to resolve debts or student loans 
before filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy, or subsequent to the discharge of debts through the 
proceeding in 2015. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 46-year-old woman, who 
has a history of financial delinquencies that began prior to 2013 when her student loans 
started to become delinquent and subsequently included a 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
 
In June 2014, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. In April 2015, she filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. In July 2015, she responded to the Government’s financial interrogatories, 
acknowledging that she had filed bankruptcy and had delinquent student loans. In 
August 2015, the court discharged the bankruptcy. In February 2016, DOHA issued the 
SOR. In March 2016, she answered the SOR, admitting all allegations and stating that 
she had been unable to resolve her student loans while the bankruptcy was pending. In 
April 2016, she received notice that she failed to submit sufficient information to mitigate 
the financial allegations, and specifically mentioned the unresolved student loans. It 
notified her that she had an additional 30 days to submit documentation relevant to her 
delinquent loans and financial issues. She did not respond.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a public trust position, as she has not established a reliable record of 
resolving her delinquent debts and demonstrating responsible judgment. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from her financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:              Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
                                                    
_________________ 
           SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
