1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-01842 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
April 11, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement security concerns. Applicant 
used marijuana with varying frequency from 1986 to 2015; used cocaine from October 
2013 to December 2014; and indicated in his electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) that he would use marijuana again. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 27, 2015, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On August 29, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on September 23, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
November 1, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on November 2, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
on December 6, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
The record was left open for receipt of additional documents. Applicant presented no 
further exhibits. The record then closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 19, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under the guideline for Drug Involvement, the SOR alleged security concerns 
related to: Applicant’s use of marijuana with varying frequency from 1986 to 2015 (SOR 
1.a); his cocaine use from October 2013 to December 2014 (SOR 1.b); and his 
expressed intent to use marijuana in the future (SOR 1.c). In his Answer and during his 
testimony, Applicant admitted SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, with clarifications. He 
denied SOR subparagraph 1.c. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a government contractor. He is a high 
school graduate. He applied for a security clearance in connection with his job with a 
defense contractor. He is married. (GE 1; Tr. 20, 29.)  
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.a alleged that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency from October 1986 to at least December 2015. Applicant testified he first tried 
marijuana in the 1980’s, but did not “start to use it on a bi-yearly basis until the 2000’s.” 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 18-24, 30-32.) He last used marijuana at a party at his house in 
December 2015, after submitting his e-QIP and being told by his assistant facility 
security officer that drug use is a “no-no.” (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 23-24, 41.) He has not used 
marijuana since then, although his wife still smokes marijuana three of four times per 
year, alone. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 18-24, 30-32.)  
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.b alleged that Applicant used cocaine with varying 
frequency, from approximately October 2013 to December 2014. Applicant explained 
that his mother-in-law was diagnosed with stage four cancer in 2014, and his wife 
turned to cocaine use to manage her grief. He used cocaine with his wife on two 
occasions during that time period. He does not condone the use of cocaine. (GE 1; GE 
2; Tr. 16-17, 25.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.c alleged that Applicant intended to use marijuana in the 
future. On his e-QIP, he stated: 
 
I do not intend or expect to use this drug in the future, however I do expect 
to be around its use in some social settings. When my mother-in-law 
passes away, my wife and I will probably smoke some pot together. (GE 
1.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that when his mother-in-law passed away, he did not follow 
through with this plan. (Tr. 26-27.) He testified he was willing to sign a statement of 
intent, and the record was left open for him to do so, but he submitted nothing further in 
that regard. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant’s assistant facility security officer testified as to his honestly, 
trustworthiness, and good character. She indicated that he has a unique skill set and 
now understands security regulations. (Tr. 35-41.) 
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following two are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c. regarding Applicant’s marijuana 
use, his cocaine use, and his expressed into to use marijuana again.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Only one year has passed since Applicant’s use of a controlled substance. He 
testified he will never use illegal drugs again. He has been forthright with the 
Government concerning his past use and future intent. These are factors that weigh in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
5 
 
However, Applicant was a mature adult and had already applied for a security 
clearance when he used marijuana in December 2015. He has been warned by his 
assistant facility security officer that drug use was not tolerated, yet he opted to use it at 
that time. Further, his wife continues to use marijuana. Because of his recent usage and 
continued association with a drug user, I cannot find that future use is unlikely to occur 
without the passage of more time. In this instance, an appropriate period of abstinence 
has not been demonstrated.  
 
The evidence does not support the full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a) or 26(b). 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof to overcome 
the concerns raised by his poor judgment related to his 29-year history of casual drug 
abuse. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant stated that he has 
not used marijuana since December 2015. He honestly divulged information about his 
drug use on his e-QIP, to the investigator, and at the hearing. He testified that he will 
not use illegal substances in the future. However, Applicant was a mature adult when he 
knowingly violated Federal laws and his employer’s policies regarding drug use. Not 
enough time has passed since Applicant’s drug use in 2015 to support a finding that 
drug abuse is unlikely to recur. Although Applicant’s honest disclosure of his drug abuse 
makes this is a close case, the adjudicative guidelines require that any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. 
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
