 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00697 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for 
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from his illegal drug involvement, 
which included periodic use of marijuana during 2003-2013 and three drug-related 
incidents of criminal conduct. In addition, he failed to file on a timely basis state income 
tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2014. Accordingly, this case is decided 
against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on June 3, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on June 22, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline H for drug involvement, 
Guideline E for personal conduct, and Guideline F for financial considerations. He 
answered the SOR with a four-page memorandum on July 11, 2016, and he requested 
a hearing.  
 
The case was assigned to me October 11, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on November 9, 2016. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1-3, and they 
were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered Exhibits A and B, which 
were admitted. The transcript of hearing (Tr.) was received November 16, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as a system tester with a company doing business in the defense industry. He has 
worked for this company since May 2015. In addition to his full-time job, he is pursuing, 
with assistance from his employer, degrees in electrical engineering and computer 
engineering.2 His employment history includes active duty in the U.S. Navy during 2000-
2003, which ended in a discharge under other than honorable conditions (UOTH) due to 
misconduct.3 He married in 2001 or 2002 and divorced in approximately 2003.4 He is 
currently living with his girlfriend who was present at the hearing. They have lived 
together since about August 2013. He lives in a state that has approved the medical use 
of marijuana and no longer criminalizes personal use of marijuana.   
 
 As alleged in the SOR, this case concerns Applicant’s illegal drug involvement, 
which consists primarily of his periodic marijuana use. It also concerns a workplace 
dispute that led to his termination from employment in 2013. He also failed to file state 
individual income tax returns on a timely basis for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2014. In 
his answer to the SOR, he admits the drug-involvement allegations; he admits a 
termination from employment in 2013, but explained he was fired for refusal to submit to 
drug testing; and he admits the failure to file the state income tax returns because he 
believed filing was unnecessary since he was owed a refund, and he is willing to file if 
he can obtain the necessary documentation.  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in 
the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 Tr. 33-34.  
 
3 Exhibit 1. An UOTH is a form of administrative discharge. This type of discharge is adverse, and it 
represents a clear departure from the conduct and performance expected of members of the U.S. armed 
forces. 
 
4 Exhibit 1; Tr. 35-36.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana on a periodic basis during 2003-2013, with his 
last usage taking place near the end of 2013.5 He disclosed using marijuana in his 2015 
security clearance application and during his 2015 background investigation.6 He also 
disclosed three drug-related incidents, the first of which took place while he was on 
active duty in the Navy.  
 
 Applicant learned that his wife had left him and intended to divorce him in late 
2002. He visited friends during the Christmas holidays and attended a party. He was 
intoxicated, someone handed him a joint, and he smoked it. He self-reported his 
marijuana use upon return to his ship. As a result, in March 2003, he received non-
judicial punishment under Article 15, UCMJ, for wrongful use of a controlled substance. 
The following month, the Navy discharged him due to misconduct and his service was 
characterized as UOTH.7 He understands he received the UOTH discharge because 
the Navy was following a zero-tolerance policy for drug abuse, but his explanation of the 
circumstances was somewhat convoluted.8 
 
 In September 2005, the police stopped Applicant for speeding while he was 
making a cross-country move to his state of current residence.9 He gave the police 
permission to search his car and they found two packs of rolling papers. He was 
arrested for misdemeanor possession of drug paraphernalia, and his car was 
impounded. After sitting in jail for a few days, he agreed to plead guilty and pay a 
$1,000 fine in order to reduce his expenses and get on with his move. To date, the fine 
remains unpaid.10   
 
 In March 2006, Applicant and a small group of friends traveled by car to a next-
door state for a camping trip.11 The driver of the car was stopped for speeding and gave 
the police permission to search the car. The police found a small amount of marijuana 
and a pipe used to smoke marijuana. The police charged everyone in the car with 
misdemeanor possession of marijuana and misdemeanor possession of drug 
paraphernalia. He spent a few hours in jail until he bailed himself out. He returned to the 
next-door state the following month, pleaded guilty to possession of marijuana, and was 
                                                          
5 Tr. 62-63.  
 
6 Exhibits 1 and 2.  
 
7 His UOTH discharge is alleged as a separate matter under Guideline E; however, it does not raise an 
independent security concern because the allegation merely recites the result or consequence of his drug 
misconduct, which is alleged and addressed under Guideline H. On that basis, the allegation in SOR ¶ 
2.b is decided for Applicant.  
 
8 Tr. 70-77.   
 
9 Tr. 40-42.  
 
10 Exhibit 10; Tr. 83-85.  
 
11 Tr. 44-47.  
 
 
4 
 
sentenced to pay a fine of $587, which he stated that he paid via installment payments 
of $50.12 
 
 Applicant continued using marijuana on a periodic basis, usually using it with 
friends. He also continued to struggle, as shown by unstable employment with low-
paying jobs, multiple residences, and a brief period of homelessness.13 It was during 
this period that he failed to file state income tax returns, because he assumed that he 
did not have to file a return if he was owed a refund. He has since filed the returns for 
2010 and 2014, but he has been unable to obtain the necessary information to file for 
2011.14 He filed the 2010 return sometime after June 22, 2016, and he filed the 2014 
return on October 9, 2016.15 He received refunds of $329 and $178, respectively. He is 
current with filing his federal income tax returns and does not owe back taxes to the IRS 
or the state.  
 
 One of Applicant’s many jobs was working as a graphic designer for a trophy and 
engraving business during 2012-2013, which ended in termination in August 2013. He 
disclosed in his security clearance application and background investigation that he was 
fired after refusal to take a drug test, which he viewed as illegal, and subsequently the 
state unemployment agency determined that his refusal was an illegal basis for 
termination.16 At the hearing, he explained the circumstances leading up to the 
termination and that the state granted him unemployment compensation due to an 
unreasonable termination.17 There is no evidence to contradict or rebut Applicant’s 
description of events on this employment matter.18 
 
 After the termination in 2013, and with the support of his girlfriend, Applicant 
decided it was time to return to school. He spent the fall months making the necessary 
preparations, and he began classes in January 2014. He last used marijuana sometime 
near of end of 2013, and he has not used marijuana or other illegal drugs in 2014, 2015, 
or 2016.19 He passed a pre-employment drug test when he began working for his 
current employer in 2015.20 He no longer associates with friends with whom he had 
                                                          
12 Exhibit 3; Tr. 46-47.  
 
13 Tr. 47-51. 
 
14 Exhibits A and B; Tr. 49-53.  
 
15 Tr. 29-31.  
 
16 Exhibits 1 and 2.  
 
17 Tr. 54-58.   
 
18 Because Applicant’s termination was found to be based on an unreasonable or illegal basis, this matter 
does not raise a security concern for personal conduct under Guideline E. Accordingly, the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 2.c is decided for Applicant.  
 
19 Tr. 62-65.  
 
20 Tr. 65.  
 
 
5 
 
used marijuana with the exception of one person who holds a medical-marijuana red 
card, and she does not use the drug in Applicant’s presence.21 
 
 Applicant stated that he does not intend to use marijuana regardless of state law 
permitting personal use.22 He further explained his intention as follows: 
 
Not while my job depends on it. That’s for sure. However, I cannot speak 
for what will happen in the future when I’m not under those same types of 
obligations. I was fully educated on the employee handbook, many, many 
polices of this company, all of the standard stuff that you would expect to 
see from any company, including things related to things, security 
clearances and stuff like that. I knew what I was getting myself into. I 
freely volunteered to do this, and I’m okay with that. 
 
And it’s not, it, my life has never been run by marijuana. It’s just like, you 
know, going out to have a drink. I’ve never in my life been in trouble for 
drinking at work. Why? Because that’s always not been okay. I’m going to 
follow the rules to the best of my ability, and I’m going to continue to 
remove anybody who’s a negative influence in my life. It did take me a 
couple of years to figure out who those negative influences were in some 
instances, but I’m more concerned with my future than my present. And 
because of that, I’m trying to find, I’m trying to get to the point where I can 
have a future.23 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.24 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”25 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.26 An 
                                                          
21 Tr. 77-78.  
 
22 Tr. 87-90.  
 
23 Tr. 90-91.  
 
24 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
25 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
26 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
 
6 
 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.27 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.28 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.29 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.30 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.31 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.32 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.33 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement, the concern is that “use of an illegal 
drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about a [person’s] reliability 
and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.”34 In applying Guideline H to the facts of this case, I note that in an October 
24, 2014 memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the 
disregard of federal law concerning use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana is relevant in 
national security determinations regardless of changes in state laws concerning 
marijuana use. Marijuana remains a Schedule I controlled substance under federal law, 
which means it is a drug that has no currently accepted medical use and has a high 
potential for abuse.35   
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
                                                          
27 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
29 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
30 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
31 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
32 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
33 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
34 AG ¶ 24.  
 
35 For information on federal drug schedules, go to http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml.  
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s periodic use of marijuana over a ten-
year-period, which ended in late 2013. I also considered the three drug-related incidents 
that led to misdemeanor convictions in state court as well as non-judicial punishment 
and an UOTH discharge from the Navy. And I considered that Applicant has not paid 
the fine imposed on him from the 2005 misdemeanor conviction. Taken together, 
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement is not minor or trivial misconduct, and it 
needs to be weighed accordingly.   
 
 Applicant presented a good case in reform and rehabilitation. It appears that he 
has turned a corner in his life, given up marijuana for the time being, enrolled in college 
to pursue engineering degrees, and obtained a good job with a defense contractor. It 
also appears that his girlfriend is a positive influence on him. He is credited with 
approximately three years of abstinence from marijuana use. Further, he stated that he 
has no intention of using marijuana in the future, although he qualified it or equivocated 
by noting that might change his mind depending on the circumstances.  
 
 In addition, Applicant receives credit in mitigation because he voluntarily reported 
the information about his illegal drug involvement in his security clearance application, 
and he has been truthful and complete in responding to questions.36 His willingness to 
self-report is an important aspect of this case. Doing so speaks highly for his integrity, 
his willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations, and his overall suitability for 
access to classified information. Nevertheless, I remain concerned due to Applicant’s 
equivocation concerning future use of marijuana, the unpaid fine from the 2005 
misdemeanor conviction, and the nature, extent, and seriousness of his illegal drug 
involvement. Accordingly, the matters under Guideline H are decided against 
Applicant.37 
 
                                                          
36 See generally AG ¶ 2(e)(1) – (2).  
 
37 The drug matters under Guideline H are cross-alleged under Guideline E in SOR ¶ 2.a. The drug 
matters are appropriately addressed under Guideline H as the judgment and reliability concerns are 
similar if not the same. Accordingly, the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a is decided for Applicant.  
 
 
8 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,38 the suitability of an applicant 
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.39 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control.  
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. His repeated 
failure to file state income tax returns bears close examination and is a matter of serious 
concern.40 The evidence shows he failed to file state returns on a timely basis for tax 
years 2010, 2011, and 2014. Moreover, he has only recently filed returns for 2010 and 
2014, while the 2011 return is still past due.  
 
 Applicant’s pattern of conduct is indicative of poor judgment and unreliability. His 
pattern of conduct also suggests that he has a problem with complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information. An applicant who has a history 
                                                          
38 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
39 AG ¶ 18. 
 
40 The General Accountability Office (GAO) expressed serious concern over the relationship between tax 
delinquents and clearance holders in its July 28, 2014 report, Security Clearances: Tax Debts Owed by 
DOD Employees and Contractors, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665052.pdf. 
 
 
9 
 
of not fulfilling their tax obligations may be said not to have demonstrated the high 
degree of judgment and reliability required for access to classified information.  
 
 Based on the record before me, I am unable to credit Applicant in explanation, 
extenuation, or mitigation of his past-due state returns. He has had ample time and 
opportunity since submitting his security clearance application in June 2015 to put his 
tax problems behind him. To his credit, he was able to finally file returns for two of the 
three years in question, but the third remains outstanding because he does not have the 
necessary paperwork. Applicant’s tax problems went on too long and are too recent to 
justify a favorable clearance decision. Accordingly, the matters under Guideline F are 
decided against Applicant.41 
  
 Taken together, Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement and ongoing tax 
problems create doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability 
to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as 
a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence 
or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 3.a:       Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
41 The matters under Guideline F are cross-alleged under Guideline E in SOR ¶ 2d. The tax problems are 
appropriately addressed under Guideline F as the judgment and reliability concerns are similar if not the 
same. Accordingly, the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.d is decided for Applicant.  
 
