                                                              
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS   
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-03679 
  ) 
Applicant for a Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
April 12, 2017                      
            
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Goldstein, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 21, 2016. On December 30, 2016, after reviewing the application and 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility issued a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and F (Financial 
Considerations) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 23, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 6, 2017. 
The hearing was held as scheduled on April 3, 2017. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits A and B, which were also 
admitted without objection. 
 
After reviewing the record, I proposed to the parties that this case was appropriate 
for a summary disposition in Applicant’s favor.1 Applicant did not object. Department 
Counsel provided written notice on April 4, 2017, that Department Counsel did not object. 
(Hearing Exhibit I.) Based on the record evidence as a whole, I conclude that Department 
Counsel presented sufficient evidence to establish the facts alleged in the SOR under 
Guidelines J and F.  
 
Under Guideline J, Applicant was charged with “improper display of license” in 
August 2014. He failed to appear in court and a warrant was issued for his arrest. He 
testified he had moved out of state and thought the ticket had been paid prior to the move. 
Once he learned of the outstanding warrant, he contacted the court and paid the 
outstanding fine. He presented documentation that showed the fine was resolved. (AE 
B.) The criminal conduct security concerns are resolved under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d). 
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant was alleged to be indebted on three debts held by 
the same creditor, in the total amount of $13,715. He presented documentation that 
shows all three debts have been paid. (AE A.) I conclude that the security concerns are 
resolved under the following mitigating conditions: AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d).  
 
 The concerns over Applicant’s history of financial problems and criminal conduct 
do not create doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered whether the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  
 
 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a security 
clearance. This case is decided for Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
1 Summary Disposition is appropriate in cases where the undisputed evidence justifies a favorable decision 
of the case, with no potential appellate issues. This decision is issued in accordance with instructions from 
the Director, DOHA, contained in an email dated November 12, 2016. 
