 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02134 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 4, 2016, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
24, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 17, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for March 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, 
and he submitted no documents. The record remained open until March 21, 2017, to 
allow Applicant to submit documents. None were received and the record closed. I 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions between 
June 1995 and October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a.), including after he was granted a DOD 
security clearance in October 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b.). His SOR and hearing admissions are 
incorporated into my findings. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He graduated from high school in 1995, and he 
attended college from 1995 to 1999, receiving a bachelor’s degree. He has been 
employed as an engineer for a DOD contractor since 2004. He was granted a DOD 
secret clearance in 2005. He was first married from 2003 to 2009, and he has been 
married to his second wife since 2012. He has two children, ages one and three.1 
 
 On his October 2015 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant listed that 
he used marijuana “no more than 20 times” between June 1995 and March 2015. He 
admitted to illegal drug use while possessing a security clearance and stated his intent 
not to use illegal drugs in the future.2 
 
 During his April 2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant clarified 
his previous disclosures about his marijuana use. He estimated that he used marijuana 
approximately 3 to 4 times between June 1995 and 2003 and that he used marijuana 
approximately 3 to 4 times between 2003 and October 2015. He admitted to using 
marijuana at least two times after having been granted a security clearance in 2005. He 
acknowledged his poor judgment, refused to disclose with whom he had used the 
marijuana, and stated his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. He told the 
investigator that he no longer associates with any individuals who use illegal drugs.3 
 
 Applicant testified that he used marijuana about four to six times between 1995 
and 1997 and an additional three to four times after being granted a clearance in 2005. 
He corrected his April 2016 interview by testifying that his last date of use was March 
2015. He admitted that he knew at the time of his drug use that such conduct was 
prohibited for individuals possessing a security clearance. He testified that he continues 
to associate with individuals who use illegal drugs. He provided no explanation for his 
                                                          
1 GE 1; Tr. 22, 25. 
 
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
more recent drug use after his eight-year period of abstinence from 1997 to 2005 and 
attributed his illegal drug use to poor judgment. 4  
 
 Applicant identified no change in circumstances since his last use of marijuana in 
March 2015, other than the birth of his second child. He received a performance award 
from his employer in September 2016. His supervisor and co-workers are unaware of 
his illegal drug use.5 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”6 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
4 Tr. 19, 22, 31, 34-44. 
 
5 Tr. 36, 37, 42, 44. 
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 
988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction; and  
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Between 1995 and March 2015, Applicant illegally used marijuana on at least 
eight occasions, including while he possessed a security clearance. Thus, AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and 25(g) apply. 
  
The Government established a case for disqualification. Accordingly, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.8 The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant: 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the 
drug involvement was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@9  
 
 In the present case, Applicant’s admitted drug use between 1995 and March 
2015 included at least three or four occasions when he was employed by a DOD 
contractor and after he was granted a DOD secret clearance. Such conduct not only 
was illegal and violated DOD policies, but it also represented a breach of trust bestowed 
upon those entrusted with safeguarding classified information. Applicant has not 
presented evidence of changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding 
of reform or rehabilitation. Because his conduct casts doubts on his reliability and 
judgment, AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.    
 
 Although Applicant has abstained from illegal drug use for about two years, he 
continues to associate with individuals who use illegal drugs. He expressed an intent to 
cease any further illegal drug use; however, he failed to provide an explanation as to 
what circumstances – beyond his admitted poor judgment – prompted him to use illegal 
drugs after having been granted a security clearance in 2005. Given Applicant’s drug 
use after an eight-year period of abstinence between 1997 and 2005, without further 
explanation, the evidence is insufficient to conclude that he has established an 
“appropriate period of abstinence.” Because Applicant’s statements on his SCA are the 
functional equivalent of a signed statement of intent to not use illegal drugs, AG ¶ 
26(b)(4) applies.   
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s expressed intent to cease further illegal drug use, his 
continued association with drug users and the gravity of his repeated illegal drug use 
while possessing a security clearance cast doubts as to his judgment and reliability. 
Therefore, I find that drug involvement concerns remain. 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline H and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, educated professional, who voluntarily disclosed his illegal 
drug use and has performed well during his employment with a DOD contractor. 
Nonetheless, he failed to adequately explain what circumstances triggered his repeated 
drug use while possessing a clearance or to identify changed circumstances since his 
last use. His continued association with drug users and his repeated use of marijuana 
while possessing a security clearance leave doubts as to his reliability and good 
judgment. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant did not mitigate the drug 
involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
