 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02137 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 27, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 19, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 24, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit any documentary 
evidence.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended 
college between 2004 and 2007, but she did not earn a degree. She married in 2000 
and divorced in 2007. She married her current spouse in 2007. She has two children 
from her first marriage, two children from her current marriage, and a stepchild. All five 
children live with Applicant and her husband.1 
 
The SOR alleges 8 student loans in collection totaling $26,785, 11 delinquent 
medical debts totaling about $7,500 and 3 miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling 
about $1,700. Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the exception of the $1,058 
deficiency owed on an auto loan after the car was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.n) and the 
$402 satellite television account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.u). She denied 
owing those two accounts. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that 
Applicant is currently liable for those two accounts.2 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to supporting a family of seven on her 
and her husband’s income. Her husband was demoted from a supervisor position in 
November 2015. Except for the period from March 2009 through February 2010, when 
Applicant was a stay-at-home mother, she has been consistently employed since 2007. 
The medical debts resulted from a period when her family could not afford the high cost 
of medical insurance.3 
 
Applicant receives about $500 per month in court-ordered child support. She has 
not made any payments on her defaulted student loans since 2010. She has not paid 
any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. She stated that her husband was promoted 
back to a supervisor position in July 2016, and she is now earning a better salary. She 
stated that she intends to pay her debts. She has not received financial counseling.4 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
April 2015. She answered “No” to all the financial questions under Section 26, including 
the following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor).  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14-15, 18-19; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-16, 18-19, 26-29; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-17, 20-25, 37-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosigner or guarantor).5    
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation in March 2016. She 
stated that her husband had a $3,000 delinquent debt, but she did not have any 
delinquent debts. When confronted with delinquent debts from her credit report, 
including her defaulted student loans, she denied knowledge of all her debts except for 
the $268 delinquent credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. She stated that she forgot 
about that debt.6 
 
 Applicant admitted during the hearing that she knew when she submitted the SF 
86 that her student loans were in default and that her student loans and medical debts 
had been turned over to collection companies. She stated that the SF 86 had to be 
turned in to the person who reported the incident that led to her husband’s demotion. 
She did not list her delinquent debts because she did not want the person to find out 
about their financial problems. She felt the individual wanted Applicant and her husband 
to be fired, and she did not want to give him anything that could have been used against 
them.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
                                                          
5 GE 1.  
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-36. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 
5 
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant is currently liable 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.u. Those allegations are concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to supporting a family of seven on her 
and her husband’s income. Her husband was demoted from a supervisor position in 
November 2015. The medical debts resulted from a period when her family could not 
afford the high cost of medical insurance. The medical debts do not generate a security 
concern, and they are mitigated. However, Applicant’s husband was promoted back to a 
supervisor position in July 2016; Applicant is now earning a better salary; and she 
receives about $500 per month in court-ordered child support. She has not paid any of 
the debts alleged in the SOR, but she stated that she intends to pay her debts. 
Intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt 
repayment or other responsible approaches.8  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Her financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 
(App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified her SF 86 when she failed to report her debts that 
had been turned over to collection companies. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
7 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 Applicant stated that she did not list her delinquent debts on the SF because she 
did not want the person that would receive the questionnaire to find out about her and 
her husband’s financial problems. That does not explain why she lied to the investigator. 
There are no applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has unresolved 
financial problems, and she intentionally provided false information about her finances 
on her SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i- 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.v:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
