 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01435 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2016. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 22, 2016, with a hearing date of January 10, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Its request to take administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq 
was marked as HE II. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open after the hearing and 
Applicant produced copies of AE B through J for inclusion in the record, but no 
additional documents.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2017.  
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. Applicant did not object and the request was granted. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as HE II. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He was born in Iraq in 1956. In 1974, he and his family 
fled to Lebanon as refugees. He arrived in the United States in 1976 under refugee 
status. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1982. He married and had two children 
who are native-born U.S. citizens. His wife passed away in 2003. He went to high 
school in Iraq, but did not graduate. He has no significant assets in the United States.2   
 
 Applicant worked as a linguist for government contractors supporting U.S. forces 
in Iraq at various times between 2003 and 2010. He has pictures and letters of support 
reflecting his assistance to U.S. forces during those times. All his immediate family 
members reside in the United States, but he has distant cousins who still reside in Iraq. 
His last contact with these cousins was in 2011.3 
 
                                                          
1 At hearing, Applicant offered AE B-J, but after admission requested the documents back so he could 
provide copies and retain the originals. 
 
2 Tr. at 6, 23, 25; GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 37, 40; GE 3-5; AE A-J. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 At various times in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2011, and 2012 Applicant visited Iraq on 
personal business not while performing linguist duties. In about 2005, he met a women 
(XX) in Iraq. He began providing significant financial support to XX and her family. 
Between 2005 and 2011, he estimated that he provided approximately $30,000 to XX. 
At some point, he began a romantic relationship with XX. She bore a child who is now 
seven years old. XX claims Applicant is the father and he does not deny that claim. 
Applicant stated his intent to marry xx and eventually bring her and the child to the 
United States. XX lives in Iraq and does not speak English. Applicant communicates 
with XX and their child on a frequent basis via Skype. He is teaching the child English. 
He also pays for the child to go to private school. Applicant also admitted to visiting and 
providing at least $12,000 financial support to another Iraqi family (taxi driver family) he 
befriended from 2005 to 2009. The members of this family are all residents and citizens 
of Iraq. Applicant believes providing financial assistance to less fortunate Iraqi families 
is the right thing to do.4 
 
 In his 2015 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant answered “no” to 
whether he had any close and/or continuing contact with a foreign national, within the 
last seven years, with whom he is bound to by “affection, influence, common interests, 
and/or obligation.” In his answer to the SOR, he admitted this statement was false. He 
also answered “no” in his SCA to whether he had ever provided any financial support to 
any foreign national. He admitted this answer was false. Applicant testified that he did 
not consider his contact with XX and the other family “close and/or continuing.” He also 
did not consider the contacts with these people “foreign” contacts because he was 
thinking of himself as an Iraqi. Applicant’s explanations are not credible.5 
 
 Applicant produced eight letters of recommendation and a certificate of 
achievement for his outstanding work as a linguist for coalition forces in Iraq during 
various times from 2004 to 2016. He was relied on by commanders to interact with Iraqi 
officials. He was trusted in that role and performed in an outstanding manner. His 
actions led to many successful missions, which contributed to the overall safety and 
protection of coalition forces. He was commended as a man of loyalty and integrity.6 
 
Iraq 
 
 The U.S. Embassy warns that U.S. citizens are at high risk for kidnapping and 
violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The U.S. government considers the 
potential threat to U.S. government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require 
them to live and work under strict security guidelines. In 2015, the Islamic State of Iraq 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-32, 36, 39, 41-42, 44, 46-50, 52, 66-67; GE 3-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-36; GE 2. 
 
6 AE B-J. 
 
 
4 
 
 
and Levant (ISIL) remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, maintaining a 
formidable force in Iraq and Syria.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
7 HE II. 
 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s close relationship with XX and the taxi driver family, all residents and 
citizens of Iraq, creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. These same relationships also create a potential 
conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified information and 
the desire to help these foreign friends as he has done in the past. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
6 
 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has performed admirably on many deployments as a linguist for U.S. 
forces. However, he has also formed strong personal relationships with two Iraqi 
families. He admitted having a romantic relationship with XX. He is the father of XX’s 
child who he supports financially. He goes to Iraq in his personal capacity to be with XX 
and their child. He also supports the taxi driver’s family with financial aid. Applicant’s 
actions place him in a position of having to choose between the interests of his Iraqi 
friends and family over those of the United States. Although Applicant has ties to the 
United States through his citizenship, his older children who live here, and his work as a 
linguist, he has no significant assets in the United States and he frequently visits Iraq as 
a private citizen to be with XX. The contact between Applicant and the two Iraqi families 
was more than casual and infrequent, particularly with XX and their child. As stated 
above, the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration and any 
doubt must be resolved in favor of national security. Because of Applicant’s continuing 
ties to his Iraqi friends and family, and the nature of the terrorism threats in Iraq, I am 
unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
7 
 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 Applicant admitted providing inaccurate information on his SCA concerning the 
extent of his foreign contacts. His explanations for doing so are not credible and I find 
his action deliberate. The record contains sufficient evidence to support application of 
AG ¶¶ 16(a).  
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
may have applicability in this case: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Providing false information on a SCA is not a minor offense. Applicant failed to 
produce evidence of mitigation. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant provided outstanding service to his country as a linguist while deployed 
to Iraq on numerous occasions. However, that service must be weighed against the 
potential threats inherent in his continuing close relationships with two Iraqi families.  
Applicant has visited Iraq to be with XX and care for their child. Iraq is a dangerous 
country where the lives of U.S. citizens are not safe with the persistent terrorism threat 
that ISIL presents. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United 
 
8 
 
 
States, and its susceptibility to terrorism are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s friends are vulnerable to coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country is susceptible to threats of terrorism. 
There is no reason to question Applicant’s loyalty and devotion to this country. 
However, he has not overcome the vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, and 
duress created by his close relationship with his friends and family in Iraq. He had 
significant contact and provided significant financial support to two families in Iraq. His 
explanation for not listing this information in his SCA was not credible. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence or personal conduct security 
concerns.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
