 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01488 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
  
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2016, and she requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
scheduling the hearing for March 8, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, and 
 
2 
 
the record remained open until March 29, 2017. Applicant submitted eight documents, 
which were admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-H, without objection.1 
I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file her federal and state income tax 
returns for several years (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) and three delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 
1.c.-1.e.). Applicant in effect denied all five allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 74 years old. She received a bachelor’s degree in physics and math 
in 1964 and received a master’s degree in math in 1968. She was married from 1964 to 
1989, and she has a 46-year-old daughter.2   
 
 Since 1985, Applicant has served as the President and CEO of a computer-
consulting business. In about 2005, the business experienced a significant downturn as 
it was unable to obtain new U.S. Government contracts. She took out personal loans to 
pay business expenses. The business remains open, but it has not generated income 
since about 2005. As a result, she obtained part-time employment with a DOD 
contractor in 2010.3 
 
 Applicant has been employed part time as a facility security officer for a DOD 
contractor since January 2010. Her net pay is approximately $1,500 to $2,000 per 
month. She estimated that she made about $20,000 from her part-time employment in 
2016. She is classified as a consultant and has not had any taxes withheld during her 
employment. She agreed that she needed to pay taxes on that income, but she believed 
that her tax deductions exceeded any liability. She has also received Social Security for 
the past six years at $2,200 per month.4 
 
 Applicant filed her federal income tax returns for tax years 2005 and 2007 about 
two years late. She did not file her federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2009 through 2014 until March 29, 2017. There is no evidence that she has filed her 
federal returns for tax years 2008 and 2015 or her state returns for tax years 2007, 
2008, and 2015. She testified that she spoke with an IRS representative in about 2014 
and on a prior unrecalled date and the representative informed her that her income level 
exempted her from filing a return. Applicant had no documentary evidence to 
corroborate these representations or her exempted status. She never contacted the 
state revenue department, but relied on her conversations with the IRS representative 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s post-hearing submissions included a cover letter (AE H) and seven attachments pre-marked 
as AE A-G. 
 
2 GE 1; GE 6. 
 
3 GE 1; GE 6. 
 
4 GE 1; GE 6; Tr. 55-56, 60-61. 
 
 
3 
 
to conclude that she was exempt from filing a state income tax return.5 Pursuant to IRS 
Publication 501, Applicant’s income from her part-time employment exceeded the 
minimum threshold requiring her to file a federal income tax return.6 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant submitted excerpts of her federal and state income 
tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2014, all dated March 29, 2017. The returns 
listed the income from her retirement account and Social Security, but her returns did 
not reflect her income from her part-time employment with the DOD contractor. She 
testified that she received income from her part-time employment for the DOD 
contractor for which she receives a Form 1099 and from which no taxes were withheld. 
There is no evidence that she disclosed this income on her federal and state income tax 
returns.7 
 
 Applicant’s credit card account in SOR ¶ 1.c. was placed for collection at least 
three years ago in the approximate amount of $4,102. In her response to the SOR, she 
claimed to have settled this debt years ago; however, she provided no documentation. 
Following the hearing, she indicated that she was negotiating a settlement with the 
collection attorney on this account. There is no evidence of any payments on this 
delinquent account.8 
 
 The delinquent utility account in SOR ¶ 1.d. was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $136. In her response to the SOR and at hearing, Applicant 
denied any knowledge of this debt. After the hearing, she mailed a $136 check to the 
creditor.9 
 
 As to the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.e., this judgment was entered against Applicant’s 
business in December 2011 in the approximate amount of $48,288. Applicant never 
used this business credit card for any personal expenses, and the business was an S-
corp. Department Counsel presented no evidence to demonstrate personal liability 
attached.10 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant was five months behind on her mortgage-
loan payments, and she is trying to refinance this loan. Between 2005 and 2012, she 
                                                          
5 IRS Pub. 501 for TY2010 requires individuals with an income over $10,750 must file a federal income 
tax return. That minimum amount increased each year and was $11,900 for TY2016. These IRS 
publications are openly available online at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/p501--2010.pdf and 
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p501.pdf. These IRS documents are admitted into the record as 
Administrative Exhibits (AX) I. 
 
6 Tr.31, 32, 35-37, 39-40. 
 
7 AE A; AE B. 
 
8 Response to SOR; GE 4; AE D. 
 
9 Response to SOR; AE D. 
 
10 Tr. 46, 49. 
 
 
4 
 
did not have health or dental insurance, which resulted in a significant expense for 
dental work. She is making monthly payments on that dental bill. She provided a 
personal financial statement reflecting a net monthly remainder of approximately 
$1,350.11 
 
 Applicant submitted four character references detailing her extensive 
volunteerism and leadership with non-profit organizations supporting women, children, 
and minorities, within her church, and with other advocacy groups. A professional 
colleague for over 30 years attested to her exemplary work performance and 
character.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
11 AE F; AE G; Tr. 53-54. 
 
12 AE C. 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax returns for tax years 2005 
and 2007 through 2014. She failed to timely file her state income tax returns for tax 
years 2007 through 2014. She had two delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d.) totaling 
approximately $4,238. Department Counsel did not establish that Applicant is personally 
liable for the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.13 Conditions that 
                                                          
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
6 
 
could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 
20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state income tax returns, as required 
by law, for several years. Several tax returns remain unfiled, and one debt remains 
unresolved. As discussed above, the recently-filed tax returns all omit Applicant’s 
income from her part-time employment from which no taxes were withheld. As a result, 
all of these returns are incorrect on their face. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond her control and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.14 Applicant’s business downturn in 2005 
contributed to her financial delinquencies, as she took out personal loans and 
refinanced her home to pay business expenses. Because these circumstances hindered 
her ability to address her delinquent debts, they constitute circumstances beyond her 
control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.15 Applicant’s failure to timely file her income tax returns cannot be 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
7 
 
attributed to her business downturn. She claimed to have relied upon information 
provided by an IRS representative to conclude that she did not need to file her federal 
and state income tax returns; however, she has failed to provide documentation to 
substantiate these claims. In addition, although she denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c. and 1.d., she failed to take any steps prior to the hearing to contact these creditors 
and resolve any dispute. Applicant failed to demonstrate that she acted responsibly in 
addressing her delinquent debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling. Although Applicant’s monthly 
budget indicates that she is able to pay her monthly expenses, she is behind on her 
mortgage-loan payments and several tax returns remain unfiled. More importantly, as 
discussed above, her recently-filed federal and state returns omit her income from her 
employment with a DOD contractor. On their face, these tax returns are incorrect.  
Given the ongoing concerns about Applicant’s tax returns, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”16 
Applicant satisfied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. She filed some of her tax returns, though they 
appear to omit significant income. Several tax returns remain unfiled, and one 
delinquent debt remains unresolved. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
To the extent Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶1.c. and 1.e., she has not 
demonstrated a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. As 
discussed above, Department Counsel has not established that Applicant has personal 
liability on the unpaid judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e.), and Applicant provided documentation to 
show the judgment was entered against the business. AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state income taxes for several years. 
Although she filed several returns following the hearing, these returns omit her income 
from her employment with a DOD contractor, and several returns remain unfiled. Given 
her inaction in addressing her delinquencies for several years and her ongoing tax 
problems, I find that financial considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
8 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated professional, who is highly regarded for her 
work performance, volunteerism, and leadership. Nonetheless, she has failed to act in a 
financially responsible manner with regards to her taxes. After years of not filing her 
federal and state returns, her recently-filed returns omit her significant income from her 
part-time employment and will require corrections. As a result, the totality of the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
