 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02653 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 16, 2015. On 
November 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replaced the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated document and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
 
2 
 
31, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on February 15, 2017. On March 3, 2017, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for March 20, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until March 30, 2017, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX B through H, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 29, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old engineering technician employed by a federal 
contractor since October 2015. He was employed by a federal contractor as an armed 
security guard from November 2011 to September 2013 and as a parts manager for an 
automobile dealership from September 2013 until he began his current job. He has 
never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in September 2008. (GX 2 at 3.) He and his wife have a seven-
year-old daughter. He did not graduate from high school, but he received a general 
educational development (GED) certificate on a date not reflected in the record. (GX 2 
at 2.) He attended a technical college from August 2006 to August 2007 but did not 
receive a degree. He incurred student loans, but he was unable to pay them after the 
period of deferment ended in 2009. His income at the automobile dealership was 
uncertain because it was based on commissions. (GX 2 at 5.)  
 
A credit bureau report (CBR) from November 2015 reflected delinquent student 
loans totaling about $25,405 and payments totaling $1,892 that were past due more 
than 120 days. It also reflected a credit-card account that was charged off and sold to 
another lender in May 2011, two credit-card accounts referred for collection and sold to 
other lenders in December 2010 and August 2011, seven closed credit-card accounts 
on which the payments had been current, a home mortgage loan that was current, an 
automobile loan that was current, and several paid-off automobile loans. (GX 3.) 
 
 Applicant refinanced the delinquent student loans through a private lending 
institution in September 2015 after he learned that his wages were about to be 
garnished. However, he made only three $250 payments and then fell behind because 
of “irresponsible choices.” (Tr. 31-32.)  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in January 2016. He told the 
investigator that his financial situation had improved after he was able to pay off other 
delinquent debts, and his wife found full-time employment. They paid off a $3,100 
balance on his wife’s student loans with a credit card that is interest free for 24 months, 
and Applicant paid off the loan on his 16-year-old vehicle. (GX 2 at 5; Tr. 24-26, 34, 39.) 
His wife has a 10-year-old vehicle on which they are still making monthly payments. (Tr. 
34, 42.) He and his wife have about $8,600 in credit-card debt, including the debt 
incurred to pay off his wife’s student loans. (Tr. 39.) 
 
A CBR from dated July 7, 2016, reflected two delinquent student loans referred 
for collection in February 2015 for $15,242 and $10,958, and they are alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. (GX 4 at 2.) It reflected two credit-card accounts that were charged off in 
2010 and 2011, but no collection accounts other than the student loans. It also reflected 
five credit-card accounts that were current when they were closed, and one automobile 
loan that was current.  
 
 In November 2016, shortly after receiving the SOR, Applicant entered into a 
rehabilitation agreement for his student loans that obligated him to make nine monthly 
$25 payments. (AX A; Tr. 38.) As of the date of the hearing, he had made the required 
payments for November 2016 through March 2017 by automatic debits from his 
checking account. (AX B through F; Tr. 40.)  
 
Based on Applicant’s discussions with the lender for his student loans, he 
anticipates that his monthly payments on his student loans will be about $183 per month 
after the loan is rehabilitated. (Tr. 38-39.) He anticipates no problem in making the 
payments, because his current net monthly remainder is about $1,000 after paying his 
living expenses and debt obligations. (Tr. 28.)  
 
 Applicant was embarrassed, remorseful, nervous, and somewhat frightened at 
the hearing. He testified that he was embarrassed when he had to explain to his 
supervisor why he had to attend the hearing. He recognizes that he has not acted 
responsibly and that his job is at risk. (Tr. 26-27.)  
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor, a deputy program manager, has known him for 
about 17 months. He considers Applicant a person of high integrity, responsibility, and 
ambition. He regards Applicant as a “highly dependable team player.” (AX G.) 
Applicant’s neighbor, a practicing attorney, describes Applicant as “an exceptional 
neighbor and friend who actively contributes to the well-being of our community,” 
especially with his contributions to a local Girl Scout troop. (AX H.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
4 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
  
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent student loans are not yet 
resolved, and they were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s unpredictable income while 
employed by the automobile dealership was a condition beyond his control. He acted 
responsibly regarding his home mortgage, automobile loans, and some of his credit-
card accounts, but he paid no attention to his student loans until he faced garnishment 
of his wages, and he did not begin his rehabilitation program until he received the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling, and he has not yet completed the rehabilitation program for his student 
loans. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant’s income was unpredictable until he began 
his current job, his wife had not found employment, and they both had delinquent 
student loans. Until he was threatened with garnishment in 2015, Applicant 
concentrated on his other debts. However, the adjudicative guidelines do not require 
that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts 
alleged in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or 
she need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant has a plan for resolving his delinquent student loans. His timely payments of 
the first five of the required nine payments, constitute “significant actions” to resolve 
them. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was remorseful, candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He 
ignored his student loans for many years, but the SOR was a “wake-up call.” He has 
limited formal education. His current job was his first meaningful job that offered benefits 
and a stable income. Faced with the prospect of losing his job, he took positive and 
significant steps to begin resolving his delinquent student loans. He has impressed his 
supervisor with his dependability, and sense of responsibility.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent student loans. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.2 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 Administrative judges do not have authority to grant conditional clearances. ISCR Case No. 01-24328, 
2003 WL 21979745 at *2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2003). However, “[t]he Government has the right to 
reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). If 
Applicant does not follow through with his plan to resolve his student loans, or if he incurs any additional 
delinquent debt, it may result in a future revocation of his security clearance. 
 
