 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01684 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 24, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 23, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 18, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant and three witnesses testified. Applicant offered exhibits 
(AE) A through I, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 26, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing paragraph three. 
The motion was granted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in SOR ¶ 1. He did not answer the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 2, and it will be considered a denial. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He is single, never married, and has no children. He is 
a high school graduate and has earned college credits, but not a degree. He has 
worked for his present employer, a government contractor, since approximately 2006.1 
 
 Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in about 
August 2008, when he was in his car and another car hit it. No breathalyzer was 
administered and the charge was dismissed. He testified that his driver’s license was 
suspended for a year. He was permitted to drive to and from work with a temporary 
license. To have his full license reinstated he was required to attend the Alcohol and 
Drug Safety Awareness Program (ADSAP). This was a four-week course. His license 
was reinstated in 2009. 2 
  
 Applicant was arrested in June 2010 and charged with DUI. He testified that he 
consumed six beers with a friend. He pled guilty and was convicted of this offense in 
2011. He did not recall the sentence imposed, but remembered he paid a fine and was 
required to attend ADSAP. He also had his driver’s license suspended for a year, but 
was permitted to drive to and from work. He testified his license was reinstated in late 
2011 or early 2012.3 
 
The ADSAP program consisted of attending class once a week for eight weeks. 
Applicant was also interviewed by an alcohol counselor and received an alcohol 
                                                          
1 Tr. 42-43, 85. 
 
2 Tr. 49-52, 61-63, 76-81; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The only evidence that Applicant was arrested in September 
2009 for DUI was his disclosure in his 2015 security clearance application (SCA). He testified that when 
he completed the SCA, he did not have information readily available on the exact date of his arrest and 
he based it on his memory. The September 2009 date listed in the SOR was incorrect.  
 
3 Tr. 46-49, 63, 81-82. 
 
3 
 
 
assessment. He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse. He successfully completed the 
program in February 2011. When asked what he learned from the program, he testified:  
 
Of course not to make the same mistake again, and try to not fall back in 
the same habits. It was definitely, I learned a lot in that class, probably 
each one of the times that I have received, or been arrested for DUI. I 
unfortunately, didn’t eat, which was something I learned not to do.4  
 
 Applicant completed a SCA in January 2015. He was arrested again in March 
2015 and charged with DUI. He testified the incident occurred on St. Patrick’s Day. He 
estimated that he consumed about six beers and one to three shots of alcohol. While 
driving he hit a parked car. He pled guilty and was convicted in February 2016. He was 
sentenced to five days in jail, fined, ordered to complete ADSAP, and was placed on 
probation for 18 months. Applicant completed the terms of the sentence and was 
released early from probation in February 2017.5   
 
Applicant testified that when he was arrested in 2010 and 2015 for DUI he was 
with the same friend. He no longer associates with this friend. They previously worked 
together, but do not any longer. He continues to consume alcohol once or twice a 
month. He testified that he has not been intoxicated since his last DUI arrest. After that 
arrest, he completed a six-month ADSAP program that required urinalysis testing twice 
a month and class once a week. He spoke with a counselor about every two months. 
His urinalysis results were negative. He was again diagnosed with alcohol abuse. His 
driver’s license was suspended again. He testified that he is not permitted to own a car 
in his name without an interlock device. The period for the license suspension has 
expired, but he has not paid the fee to have it reinstated. He does not presently own a 
car because he is waiting to see if he can afford one.6  
 
Applicant testified that he was having personal issues at the time of the March 
2015 DUI. His father was chronically ill and bedridden. He lived with his parents and 
helped his mother. His father passed away in May 2016. His brother passed away in 
April 2015. He accepted responsibility for his behavior.7 
 
Character witnesses who have worked with Applicant for many years testified on 
his behalf. Applicant also provided character letters. He was described as remorseful for 
his conduct and has changed his life. He has matured and grown up. He is honest, 
reliable, trustworthy, dependable, and a great employee. His current supervisor, who is 
also the facility security manager, testified that Applicant is an important team member. 
                                                          
4 Tr. 53, 65-67; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. 43-46, 60-61, 73-75, 86; GE 1, 4, 5; AE C, D, E. 
 
6 Tr. 45-46, 59, 70-72, 83-85, 87, 90-91; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. 68; AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
He was unaware of Applicant’s 2011 DUI until Applicant reported his two DUIs in 2016. 
He has no reservations about Applicant holding a security clearance.8  
 
Applicant stated in a letter that he will never abuse alcohol again and consented 
to an automatic revocation of a security clearance should he violate his promise.9 He 
provided documents reflecting awards and recognitions, performance evaluations, and 
biographical information.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 22-41, 53-57; AE A, J. I have not considered Applicant’s failure to report his arrest to his facility 
security officer for disqualifying purposes, but it may be considered when making a credibility 
determination, in mitigation, and when analyzing the whole-person. 
 
9 Tr. 57 68-70; AE B. 
 
10 AE F, G, H, I, K. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22. The following 
is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2008 for DUI, and was convicted of DUIs in 2011 and 
2015. AG ¶¶ 22(a) applies.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
6 
 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser”). 
 
Applicant’s first DUI arrest was in 2008. The charge was dismissed, but he went 
to ADSAP and his license was suspended.11 He was charged again in 2010 with a 
second DUI and convicted in 2011. He was ordered to attend ADSAP, pay fines, and 
his license was suspended. He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse. In March 2015, he 
hit a car after consuming alcohol and was charged with a third DUI. He was sentenced 
to five days in jail, fined, and again ordered to attend ADSAP. He was released early 
from probation in February 2017. Applicant repeatedly exercised poor judgment while 
consuming alcohol. He was 27 years old when he was first arrested for DUI, well 
beyond the period of youthful indiscretion. Although it has been two years since his last 
conviction, it has been less than three months since he was released from probation. 
Each time he was arrested or convicted he had an opportunity to learn from his 
mistakes, but he failed to do so. There is no indication that he is alcohol dependent, but 
he has been diagnosed as abusing alcohol, and he continues to consume it. His 
previous arrests and convictions have not been a deterrent. Applicant indicated his 
commitment to not abuse alcohol in the future. Considering Applicant has been arrested 
three times for DUI and convicted twice, attended ADSAP three times, and continues to 
consume alcohol, an insufficient period has passed since Applicant was released from 
court-ordered probation to conclude future alcohol-related issues will not recur. His 
behavior was not infrequent and did not occur under unique circumstances. His conduct 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG¶ 23(a) 
does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has had any alcohol-related issues since the 
last DUI in March 2015, and he has accepted responsibility for his conduct. However, 
based on Applicant’s seven-year history of situational abuse of alcohol and his 
continued consumption of it, I find not enough time has passed to conclude future 
problems will not recur. AG¶ 23(b) does not apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
11 Applicant was not convicted of DUI in 2008, but he testified that he attended ADSAP and his license 
was suspended. I have not considered his testimony that his license was suspended three times for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider it when applying the mitigating conditions, making a credibility 
determination, and in analyzing the whole person.  
 
7 
 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested three times for DUI and convicted twice. The evidence 
raises the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
The same analysis under the alcohol consumption guideline applies under the 
criminal conduct guideline. I have considered Applicant’s good character evidence, work 
performance, awards, and remorsefulness. I have also considered that he failed to 
disclose his past DUI arrests and conviction to his employer as required until 2016. 
Despite some mitigation, the evidence is insufficient to overcome Applicant’s repeated 
criminal conduct. AG ¶ 32(a) and AG ¶ 32(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36 years old. He was arrested three times and convicted twice of 
DUI. He was recently released from probation related to the last conviction. Applicant’s 
conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the alcohol consumption guideline and criminal conduct guideline security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
