 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02522 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to mitigate security concerns under Guideline B. He mitigated personal conduct security 
concerns under Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2014, Applicant submitted his first Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment as 
a linguist for a defense contractor. (Item 4) He was interviewed by a security 
investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 24, 2014 (Item 8). 
Applicant submitted another e-QIP on February 9, 2015 (Item 3), and was interviewed 
by an OPM security investigator on March 18, 2015 (Item 7). After reviewing the results 
of the OPM interviews and investigations, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On July 27, 2016, 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B and personal conduct under Guideline E. (Item 1) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2016. He admitted all of the 
allegations under Guideline B, except allegation 1.b, concerning his wife’s citizenship 
and residence. He denied the personal conduct allegation under SOR 2.a. He provided 
detailed information concerning the reasons for his admissions and denials. He elected 
to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on September 30, 2016. Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on October 3, 2016, and was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. (Item 12) He provided additional information in response to the 
FORM on January 11, 2017. (Item 13) Department Counsel had no objection to 
consideration of the additional material. (Item 14) I was assigned the case on April 4, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1985 and moved with his family to 
Pakistan in 1994 because of the turmoil and instability in Afghanistan. He lived in 
Pakistan with his family and graduated from high school in 2002. The family returned to 
Afghanistan immediately after Applicant graduated from high school. After returning to 
Afghanistan. Applicant worked for Afghan businesses as an information technology 
manager or program manager, as a linguist and translator for U.S. forces, and as an 
information technology manager for a U.S. company doing business in Afghanistan. 
Applicant married in Pakistan on January 4, 2007. His wife is an Afghan citizen but she 
holds a United States alien registration card. She now resides with Applicant’s parents 
in Afghanistan. They have no children. 
 
 Applicant entered the United States on September 19, 2008. Applicant worked in 
various information technology positions in the United States and attended a community 
college until August 2009. From August 2009 until September 2013, Applicant was a 
linguist for U.S. Forces in Afghanistan. He was unemployed from September 2013 until 
February 2014, when he became self-employed or worked as an Uber driver in the 
United States. He became a United States citizen on April 1, 2014, and received his 
United States passport on April 14, 2014. He then worked as a laboratory technician 
before returning to Afghanistan in February 2015 as a translator/linguist for U.S. Forces. 
He is still employed in Afghanistan by a government contractor as a linguist. (Item 3, e-
QIP, dated March 2, 2015; Item 4, e-QIP, dated June 4, 2014; Item 7, PSI dated 
November 15, 2015; Item 8, PSI dated June 24, 2014)  
 
 Applicant has many family members, relatives, and friends who are residents 
and/or citizens of Afghanistan or Pakistan. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits that 
his parents (SOR 1.a), four brothers (SOR 1.c), three sisters-in-law (SOR 1.e), his sister 
 
3 
 
 
(SOR 1.g), two uncles (SOR 1.i), and friends (SOR 1.j) are residents and citizens of 
Afghanistan. The SOR alleges that his wife is a citizen of Afghanistan living in India. 
However, Applicant admits, and available evidence shows, that his wife is a citizen of 
Afghanistan residing with his parents in Afghanistan (SOR 1.b). The SOR alleges, and 
Applicant admits, that he has two brothers (SOR 1.d), a sister-in-law (SOR 1.f), and in-
laws (SOR 1.h) who are citizens of Afghanistan residing in Pakistan. It does not appear 
from the case file that there are any family members residing in the United States.  
 
 The SOR alleges that during a counterintelligence polygraph examination 
Applicant deliberately attempted to physically manipulate the polygraph data. (SOR 2.a) 
Applicant denied this allegation. 
 
 Applicant has been very candid in his response to the SOR in providing 
information about his family members and relatives in Afghanistan and Pakistan. His 
wife has been an approved resident alien of the United States since December 2010. 
She is living with his parents in Afghanistan. He talks to his wife daily using a variety of 
electronic media. Applicant admits that his wife has visited India a number of times 
recently to receive fertility treatments.  
 
 His mother is a house wife and his father a self-employed physician living in 
Afghanistan. He talks to his parents about twice a week concerning family members and 
family matters. He provides them financial support when requested. He applied for his 
parents to come to the United States and they have received the first level of approval.  
 
 Two of Applicant’s brothers are high school students living at home with his 
parents. He talks to them a few times a week about their schoolwork. His third brother 
and his family lives with his parents and works for a UN agency in Afghanistan. He talks 
to him by phone for a few minutes about once every two weeks. His fourth brother is a 
director for an agency of the Afghan House of Representatives. He does not talk to this 
brother often since the brother had an argument with Applicant’s wife.  
 
 Applicant has two brothers who are citizens of Afghanistan but students residing 
in Pakistan. On is a medical student who plans to return to Afghanistan shortly to 
resume his medical training there. He talks to this brother every few weeks. The other 
brother recently graduated from college with a business degree. He is in the process of 
moving to Afghanistan to live with his parents. Applicant financially supported this 
brother education. Applicant talks to this brother about once a week.  
 
 Applicant has four sisters-in-law in Afghanistan who are house wives. Two live 
with his parents and he talks to them for a few minutes about every two weeks about 
family matters. The third sister-in-law just moved back to Afghanistan from Pakistan and 
lives with his parents. He does not see or communicate with the fourth sister-in-law 
because of the estrangement from his brother, her husband. His sister is a student in 
Afghanistan and lives with his parents. She is close to his wife. He talks to the sister 
once a week.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law was a long time resident of Pakistan working as a driver 
for a company but is now deceased. His mother-in-law is a house wife who still lives in 
Pakistan. Applicant talks to her every few weeks, but his wife talks to her more 
frequently. Applicant has two uncles. He does not see or communicate with one of his 
uncles very often, but talks to the other uncle every few weeks. He has friends who 
were citizens and residents of Afghanistan. However, the friends worked as linguists for 
the U.S. forces and they are now living in the United States. He communicates with 
them over electronic media.    
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately attempted to physically manipulate 
polygraph data. The polygraph examiner’s comments concerning the test states: 
 
“All issues were favorably resolved. Initially, EXAMINEE was 
uncooperative and displayed unusual physiological responses. During, the 
beginning of testing, atypical physiological responses were observed, 
indicative of a deliberate attempt to physically manipulate the polygraph 
data. EXAMINEE was directly confronted and admitted to deliberately 
attempting to create physiological responses to specific questions during 
the polygraph examination. However, EXAMINEE would not furnish any 
further details such as why HE was doing this or where HE learned such 
practices. Thereafter, the physiology appeared to be acceptable.” (Item 9 
at 2) 
 
 Applicant denies that he attempted to physically manipulate the polygraph data 
during his counterintelligence examination. He did his best to comply with the 
instructions of the examiner. He did nothing that was against the rules of the polygraph 
process. He admits he was nervous and may have had some involuntary body tremors. 
He did not take any actions at the examination with an intent to affect the polygraph 
data. Applicant also stated that the test was successfully completed and he passed. 
(Response to SOR) 
 
 An Army colonel, the senior adviser in Afghanistan working with Applicant, 
commented that if it were not for Applicant’s dedication to duty, his unit would not have 
been able to advise the Afghan military on mission critical tasks. Applicant is an integral 
link between his advisor team and Afghan counterparts. Applicant is a compassionate 
and morally upstanding person. Applicant is motivated, dedicated, and contributes 
strongly to the organization. He has never questioned Applicant’s loyalty. Applicant’s 
expertise in translation and interpretation is greatly needed. He recommends that 
Applicant be granted eligibility for access to classified information. (Response to FORM, 
Letter, dated November 25, 2016) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant pointed out that he has worked with the 
U.S. military as a local national linguist since 2005. He is proud to be associated and 
dedicated to serving the U.S. military and government. He has received many 
Certificates of Appreciation, Letters of Commendation, Letters of Recommendation, and 
performance wards.  
 
5 
 
 
 Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, and it was a monarchy 
until a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded and occupied 
Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the mujahedeen. The Soviet Union withdrew in 
February 1989 pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United 
States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahedeen were not a party to the agreement and 
refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several factions, including the 
Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan, committed 
atrocities against minority populations, and provided sanctuary to terrorist organizations. 
U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban 
out of power by November 2001. With the assistance and support of the United States, 
a new democratic government took office in 2004. 
 
 Afghanistan formed a democratic government in 2004. The United States and its 
coalition partners have over 50,000 troops serving in Afghanistan assisting the Afghan 
government in maintaining peace and stability in the country. Even though progress has 
been made since then, Afghanistan faces many challenges including defeating terrorists 
and insurgents, recovering from decades of civil strife, and rebuilding an economy and 
infrastructure. The Taliban insurgency has continued with frequent, sophisticated, 
dangerous, and destabilizing activities in spite of United States and coalition military 
operations. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence. The Taliban continues to 
maintain momentum in spite of losses to their leadership. Armed conflict has spread to 
almost one-third of the country. The lack of security in many areas and generally low 
government capacity and competency has hampered efforts at self-governance and 
economic development. There is continued government corruption and substantial drug 
trade.  
 
 Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor with extrajudicial killings, 
torture, poor prison conditions, official impunity, prolonged pretrial detention, restrictions 
on freedom of press and religion, violence against women, sexual abuse against 
children, and human trafficking. Its poor human rights record is due to the continuing 
insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two decades of 
war. In spite of efforts by the United States and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The weak government and internal 
instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, terrorists, and insurgents to 
continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile to the United States. 
Insurgents use narcotics trafficking and kidnapping to finance their military and technical 
capabilities. Suicide bombing attacks continue to inflict casualties. The Taliban has 
strengthened its activities because of Pakistan funding sources, the drug trade, and 
kidnappings. The Taliban insurgent operations result in numerous attacks and deaths 
targeted at non-government organizations, journalists, government workers, and United 
Nation workers. There are militant attacks by rockets, vehicle-born explosive devices, 
and suicide bombing, even in the capital city, Kabul. The United States Department of 
State classifies the situation in Afghanistan as a critical security threat to United States 
citizens. (Item 10) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Pakistan and India were British colonies until after World War II. In 1947, India 
and Pakistan were granted independence by Great Britain. Pakistan today has a 
parliamentary form of federal government with a population of over 170 million, almost 
all of which are Muslims. The country has very low income, half the population is 
illiterate, and the life expectancy is only 64 years. Pakistan has the eighth largest armed 
forces in the world. It is well trained and disciplined. However because of budget cuts, 
the armed forces have not been able to maintain their equipment as needed. Pakistan is 
one of the world's nuclear powers.  
 
 There are extensive terrorist activities in Pakistan. Pakistan was one of only three 
countries to recognize the Taliban regime in its neighbor Afghanistan. However, after 
September 11, 2001, Pakistan reassessed its relationships with the Taliban and 
pledged support for the United States and international efforts to remove the Taliban 
from power. However, the Taliban is known to be active in parts of Pakistan especially 
along the Afghan and Iranian borders. Financial resources from Pakistan have 
permitted the Taliban in Afghanistan to exist and gain strength. Al Qaida is believed to 
be headquartered in the border areas between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Pakistan's 
Army tried to control this area but met with major resistance. The United States 
considers these terrorist safe areas as ungoverned. The terrorists pose a threat to 
United States national security because of their ability to organize, plan, raise funds, 
and recruit, train and operate in the area. The State Department warns United States 
citizens to curtail non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the terrorist threats. 
Terrorists have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where 
Americans are known to congregate or visit. Pakistan’s human rights situation and 
record are poor. 
 
 Pakistan and the United States established diplomatic relationships in 1947 and 
the United States provided economic and military assistance to Pakistan. The Soviet 
invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 highlighted the common interests of the United States 
and Pakistan. They agreed to a large economic and military assistance program. 
However, there continues to be incidents of violence against American interests. Since 
September 2001, Pakistan provided extensive assistance in the war on terror and the 
United States stepped up its economic assistance. In 2004, the United States 
recognized Pakistan as a major non-NATO ally. The United States sold fighter aircraft to 
Pakistan thereby deepening their strategic relationship. The United States and Pakistan 
strategic partnership is based on the shared interests of the United States and Pakistan 
in building stable and sustainable democracy, and in promoting peace, stability, 
prosperity, and democracy in South Asia and across the globe. However, in recent 
years, this relationship has become very strained. (Item 11) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
7 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
 
8 
 
 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant has extensive immediate family members who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. He also has family member who are citizens of Afghanistan 
but residents of Pakistan. Applicant’s spouse, parents, four brothers, a sister, three 
sisters-in-law, and two uncles have been citizens and residents of Afghanistan all of 
their lives. Applicant’s two brothers, a sister-in-law, and his mother-in-law are citizens of 
Afghanistan but reside in Pakistan. Applicant has some level of personal, or through 
electronics, contact with these relatives. Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan are a security concern and raise the following Foreign Influence Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has contact with family members who are residents and citizens of 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Both countries experience dangerous, destabilizing terrorist’s 
activities. Both countries have an increase in violence against civilians, a general lack of 
security, and a poor human rights record. There is a growing sense of violence creating 
 
9 
 
 
unsafe and unstable conditions. The United States Department of State issued travel 
warning for U.S. citizens in both countries based on terrorist activities and both 
countries inability to provide security. These factors place a heightened risk of 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion on Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for or obligation to immediate family members. Applicant 
has extensive contact with his family member in Afghanistan and Pakistan that re- 
enforce the presumption. The facts show close and continuing contact between 
Applicant and his spouse, parents, siblings and their families, and uncles. Applicant has 
extensive telephonic and other electronic contact with his spouse daily and with his 
parents and some siblings a few times a week. He has contact with other siblings less 
frequently, a few times a monthly. He provides financial support for some of his siblings 
and family members. This level of contact is not casual or infrequent, and indicates that 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty to the family members is high rather than minimal.  
 
 I am not convinced that he still has friends in Afghanistan that are a security 
concern as alleged in SOR 1.j. Applicant noted that his friends are former linguists who 
are now U.S. citizens living in the United States. I find for Applicant on SOR 1.j. 
 
 Applicant’s ties and sense of loyalty to the United States in not as extensive. He 
spent only a short time actually living in the United States. He came to the United States 
in September 2008, and returned to Afghanistan in August 2009 and worked for U.S. 
Forces as a linguist until October 2013. He only became a U.S. citizen a few years ago 
on April 1, 2014. He left again for Afghanistan to work as an interpreter in February 
2015 and has been in Afghanistan since then. All of his immediate family member are in 
either Afghanistan or Pakistan. He has no family members in the United States. In 
 
10 
 
 
determining his sense of loyalty to the United States, I have considered that he is 
sponsoring his parents and some siblings for entry into the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan can place him in a 
position to have to choose between the interest of the family members and the interests 
of the United States. The information presented by Applicant does not negate the 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
because of the circumstances in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Even though his family 
members are ordinary citizens, the situation in both countries is such that anyone living 
in the countries are vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or inducement to provide 
protected information. His connection to and loyalty to the United States is not so deep 
and longstanding that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
United States interests. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his heavy burden to show 
that his relationships with his family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan are not a 
security concern. I conclude Appellant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign 
influence.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Personal conduct is always a 
security concern because it asks whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence 
that the person can be trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
A security concern is raised when an Applicant refuses to provide full, frank, and truthful 
answers to lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personal security or trustworthiness determination. 
(AG ¶ 15) 
 
Applicant was administered a counterintelligence polygraph examination in June 
2016. The polygraph examiner reported that Applicant exhibited unusual physiological 
responses indicating a deliberate attempt to physically manipulate the polygraph data. 
The report of Applicant’s conduct from the polygraph examiner raises Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition under AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative). 
 
I considered the following Personnel Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
11 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 The polygraph examiner’s report stated that Applicant admitted he deliberately 
attempted to create physiological responses to certain questions. Applicant denied a 
deliberate attempt to manipulate the examination. Applicant admitted to being nervous 
about the polygraph examination. The polygraph examiner also reported that the test 
was successfully completed. Applicant is not so sophisticated that he would know and 
be able to use a means to manipulate a polygraph examination. Based on this 
information, I am not convinced that Applicant deliberately attempted to manipulate the 
polygraph examination as opposed to just being nervous about the examination. 
Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. I considered that 
Applicant has worked as a linguist for U.S. Forces in Afghanistan for many years with 
no reported security issues. I have considered the recommendation of the senior 
military adviser.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s immediate family members and other relatives in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan creates a heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the 
 
12 
 
 
potential for vulnerability, pressure, or coercion of Applicant by Afghan or Pakistani 
officials. These facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for access to classified information. The protection of the national security 
is the paramount consideration. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated foreign influence concerns based 
on his family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Applicant mitigated personal 
conduct security concerns. Because Applicant has not mitigated security concerns 
arising foreign influence, access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1. i:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
