 
 
 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 16-01261 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to file Federal and state income tax returns, and 
not paying taxes and delinquent debts. He did not mitigate the resulting financial 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 25, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On November 1, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On December 20, 
2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for January 11, 2017. The 
case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. The record closed at the end of 
the hearing.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e and 1.f. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, on the basis that he resolved the allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He married his wife in 1981, and separated from her 
about 20 years ago. In 1992, he began a position with a company that has defense 
contracts. (Tr. 14-15.)  
 
 On December 12, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). In response to questions related to his financial record, he disclosed that he 
failed to file Federal and state tax returns and pay taxes for years 2008 through 2013. 
(GE 1.) 
 
  Applicant’s tax and financial problems began while he lived with his wife. Earlier 
in his career, he was traveling for long periods for his job and relied on his wife to 
manage their finances. In 1998 or 1999, he learned that his wife had a serious drug 
problem and was spending large amounts of money. They subsequently separated 
causing him additional financial problems. He became responsible for numerous 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 16-18.) 
 
 Applicant could not remember if he filed tax returns after he separated in 1998 or 
1999. He admitted that from 2000 until 2014 or 2015, he had no contact with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and did not file Federal or state returns for those years.1 
(Tr. 18-20.) He did not know how to manage his tax problem because his wife had the 
necessary tax documents. Subsequently, one year of not filing returns turned into many 
years. He said, “It was just too much for me to deal with.” (Tr. 18-19.) 
 
 When Applicant’s employer asked him to apply for a security clearance in or 
about December 2014, Applicant knew that he needed to resolve his unfiled tax returns 
and pay any outstanding taxes. Applicant spoke to his supervisor and told him about his 
tax problems. The supervisor referred Applicant to an accountant to help him handle the 
                                            
1The SOR did not allege security concerns based on these unfiled returns for these years. Hence, these 
facts will not be considered in an analysis of disqualifying conditions. They may be discussed in the 
analysis of mitigating conditions, the whole-person concept, and Applicant’s credibility.   
 
 
 
 
3 
matters. (Tr. 19.) Applicant knows that he should have filed his tax returns sooner, and 
did not offer any excuses for his failure to do so. (Tr. 20.)  
 
 In February 2015, after consulting with an accountant, Applicant filed Federal tax 
returns for years 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2013. In June 2015, he paid the IRS $23,650 
for unpaid taxes for some of those years, which resolved all taxes owed to the IRS. 
(AR.) He borrowed money from his 401(k) to make that payment. He is making monthly 
payments on this loan. (Tr. 23-24.)  
  
 Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file income tax returns with State 1 for 
years 2008 through 2012. However, he was not indebted to State 1 for unpaid taxes for 
those years. His accountant learned that State 1 had failed to credit Applicant’s yearly 
withholdings to the state taxes, which resulted in a levy for years 2008 through 2012. 
After that mistake was corrected, Applicant did not have an outstanding tax liability. In 
August 2016, State 1 released a $21,575 levy it had issued in April 2016. (Tr. 26; AR; 
AE B.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file income tax returns with State 2 for 
years 2008 through 2013. After filing his returns, Applicant paid $2,383 to State 2 for 
outstanding taxes he owed for tax years 2008 through 2013. He made that payment in 
October 2016. (Tr. 27; AR; AE C.) 
  
 In addition to tax matters, the SOR alleged two delinquent medical debts, one for 
$680 and one for $60. They became delinquent in 2013 and 2015. Applicant paid the 
$60 medical bill, but did not provide proof of payment. He has not resolved the $680 
medical bill.  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $60,000. He does not have a written budget. His 
accountant has provided him some credit counseling. (Tr. 21-22.) He does not intend to 
ignore his taxes in the future. (Tr. 32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
 
 
 
 
4 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
 
 
 
5 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes three disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has a history of unwillingness to satisfy his Federal and state tax 
obligations. He failed to timely file Federal and state income tax returns from 2008 
through 2013 and failed to timely pay outstanding Federal and state taxes. He also has 
been unwilling to resolve delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out four conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant’s failure to resolve unfiled and unpaid Federal and state taxes on a 
timely basis continued for about 15 years. He also has two medical debts that remain 
unresolved. His failure to comply with legal tax obligations for years casts doubt on his 
current judgment and reliability. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b), as there is insufficient evidence to conclude that circumstances beyond his 
control prevented him from timely filing or paying taxes from 2000 to 2013, or that he 
acted responsibly during those years. He acknowledged that he did not know how to 
manage these problems, and did not seek professional help until late 2014 or early 
2015, when he applied for a security clearance.  
 
The evidence establishes limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant recently 
received credit counseling from his accountant. He filed all outstanding Federal and 
state tax returns in 2015, and finished resolving all unpaid taxes in October 2016. Given 
the length of his history of non-compliance with tax laws and two unresolved medical 
debts, full mitigation is not established.  
 
Applicant did not make a good-faith effort to timely file outstanding Federal and 
state tax returns for many years or pay delinquent taxes. He did not begin to resolve 
those problems until 2014 or 2015, when he applied for a security clearance. He did not 
document proof of payment for two medical debts that have been delinquent since 2013 
and 2015. AG ¶ 20(d) does not establish mitigation for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, or 1.f.   
 
Applicant established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to the allegation in AG ¶ 
1.b. After contacting State 1 in 2015, Applicant’s accountant learned that the state made 
a mistake in assessing tax liability for the years alleged, and that Applicant did not owe 
any taxes. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following: 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 61-year-old 
man, who has successfully worked for his employer since 1992. These are positive 
factors in this case.  
 
Applicant’s 15-year history of failing to timely file Federal and state tax returns, 
and resolve unpaid taxes and two delinquent debts, precludes his eligibility for a 
security clearance. He acknowledged that his procrastination caused the security 
concerns. While testifying, he displayed candor and remorse about his conduct and 
stated his intention to stay current with tax obligations in the future. At this time, 
however, he has not established a record of complying with tax laws and managing 
financial obligations. His recent actions are not sufficient to outweigh his history of non-
compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to file and pay taxes. The DOHA Appeal 
Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).3  
   
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:             For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1f:                         Against Applicant 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                             
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
