 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00138 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to (Guideline B) foreign 
influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 4, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether her 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
2 
 
 
On June 27, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 12, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On August 15, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for September 13, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibit (GE) 1, which 
was received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called her husband as 
a witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into 
evidence without objection. On September 21, 2016, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.).  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Taiwan. 
Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for 
those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 
11, Exhibit I (1-13).) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Taiwan were derived from Department Counsel’s country summary and accompanying 
documents as indicated under subheading “Taiwan” of this Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted with explanations all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 
1.e, which she denied. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information   
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old logistician who seeks employment with a defense 
contractor. She is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. Successfully vetting for 
a secret security clearance is a condition of her employment. (Tr. 13-16, 56-57; GE 1) 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Taiwan. She was awarded an 
associate’s degree in business in Taiwan in June 1999. Applicant initially came to the 
 
3 
 
 
United States under a student visa in August 1999 and received a certificate to teach 
English in June 2002. She returned to Taiwan in January or February 2003. Applicant 
returned to the United States in March 2005, again under a student visa. She received a 
business management certificate with an emphasis in marketing in December 2005. 
Applicant applied for and received her “green card” in the summer of 2007, and became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2011. She was issued her U.S. passport in July 2011. 
She surrendered her Taiwanese passport to her facility security officer in January 2015. 
(Tr. 16-24, 44, 49-50, 57-58; GE 1; AE A) 
 
Applicant married her U.S.-born husband, who is of Taiwanese descent, in the 
United States in September 2006. She has two U.S.-born daughters, ages ten and five. 
Her husband holds a PhD and is employed by the U.S. military as a civilian employee. 
(Tr. 19-20, 24-25, 60-64; GE 1) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s father is a resident citizen of Taiwan. He is a semi-retired owner of a 
private company that imports and sells ceramic materials. He is a cancer survivor 
currently in remission. Applicant’s father spends the majority of his time volunteering at 
a local city government and prosecutor’s information desk as well as volunteering at a 
nursing home. Applicant’s mother passed away when she was 17 years old. Applicant 
communicates with her father “every two to three months” by telephone. (Tr. 25-29, 30, 
32-33, 50; GE 1) Applicant and her husband plan to bring her father to the United States 
to care for him. (Tr. 65-66) 
 
 Applicant is the oldest of three children. She has a younger brother, who is a 
resident citizen of Taiwan, and a younger sister, who is a resident of Singapore and 
citizen of Taiwan. Her brother served 18 months of mandatory military service in Taiwan 
and remains in the inactive reserves. Applicant’s brother was previously employed as 
an electrical engineer and is currently employed as a salesperson for a private 
company. She communicates with her brother on an “infrequent” basis typically by 
telephone. (Tr. 29-31, 33; GE 1) Applicant’s sister is employed as an insurance agent 
for a private insurance company. She communicates with her sister with the same 
frequency as she does with her father by telephone. (Tr. 31-32, 50-51; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant has a cousin in her “50s” who is a resident citizen of Taiwan. Her 
cousin and her husband work for a private company that manufactures screws and 
nails. Applicant communicates with her cousin typically once a year “around the 
Chinese New Year.” (GE 1; Tr. 35-36) Applicant maintains a casual friendship with an 
assistant research fellow employed at a government-affiliated research institution in 
Taiwan. She met him during her previous employment. (Tr. 39-40)  
 
 One of the SOR allegations alleged that Applicant was a partial owner in her 
family’s business. She denied that allegation stating that she divested herself of her 
ownership in 2011. (Tr. 33-34; GE 1) She maintains a bank account in Taiwan with an 
approximate balance of $100. (Tr. 34-35, 51-53; GE 1) 
 
4 
 
 
 In contrast to Applicant’s limited assets in Taiwan, she and her husband have a 
home valued at $499,900, a 401k retirement worth $13,000, a savings account with a 
$3,000 balance, and a checking account with a $2,000 balance. Additionally, Applicant 
and her husband own two automobiles and numerous personal possessions. She 
estimates the total value of her U.S. assets to be “about a half a million dollars.” (Tr. 40-
44) Applicant is registered to vote in the United States. (Tr. 44) Applicant provided a 
copy of her HUD settlement statement documenting the value of her home when 
purchased in 2015 as well as her current property tax bill. (Tr. 46; AE C) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted several character or reference letters and a farewell card 
from her former supervisors and colleagues. The collective sense of these exhibits 
reflect that Applicant is conscientious, loyal, hardworking, and trustworthy. (Tr. 44-46; 
AE B) Applicant has a history of involvement in her church and local community. (Tr. 46-
48; AE D-E) She testified that she likes living in the United States very much. After 
Applicant returned to Taiwan the first time in 2003, she had to convince her father to 
support her return to the United States to resume her studies. (Tr. 58) She would very 
much like to continue her career and stated she had no control over where she was 
born. (Tr. 59) Her in-laws live in the United States and she occasionally sees them. (Tr. 
59-60)  
  
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan’s 
independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy; however, “maintaining strong, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan is also a major U.S. goal, in line with [the U.S.] desire to 
further peace and stability in Asia.” The United States supports Taiwan’s membership in 
appropriate international organizations where statehood is not a requirement for 
membership and encourages its meaningful participation in appropriate international 
organizations, such as the World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic 
relations with the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has been recognized to be in the 
long-term interest of the United States by six consecutive administrations.  
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resort to coercive measures against its citizens to 
collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States have expanded since 1979. 
Export-Import Bank financing, Overseas Private Investment Corporation guarantees, 
 
5 
 
 
normal trade relations (NTR) status, and ready access to U.S. markets have enhanced 
the Taiwan economy. “In recent years, AIT[1] commercial dealings with Taiwan have 
focused on expanding market access for American goods and services. AIT has been 
engaged in a series of trade discussions that have focused on protection of intellectual 
property rights and market access for U.S. goods and services.”   
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One 
report to the U.S. Congress concerns foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage. That report notes that Taiwan was then known to be an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence. The report ranked Taiwan after China, Japan, Israel, 
France, and Korea as an active collector of such information. Although some of the 
record information about Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting U.S. classified or 
sensitive information is more than 10 years old, several exhibits address more recent 
espionage by Taiwan’s National Intelligence Bureau (NSB). There is some evidence 
that Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven years to 
obtain protected and classified information.  
 
The United States is committed to assisting Taiwan with maintenance of 
Taiwan’s defensive capabilities. “The United States has continued the sale of 
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan in accordance with the Taiwan 
Relations Act, which provides for such sales and which declares that peace and stability 
in the area are in U.S. interests. Sales of defensive military equipment are also 
consistent with the 1982 U.S.-P.R.C. Joint Communique.”  
 
Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. State Department urges caution 
within the vicinity of any political demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
                                                          
1 The American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) is a private nonprofit corporation with its headquarters in 
the Washington, DC area and offices in Taipei and Kaohsiung. It is authorized to issue visas, accept 
passport applications, and provide assistance to U.S. citizens in Taiwan. (HE 5 at 7) 
 
6 
 
 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
 
7 
 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contact with her elderly father in Taiwan and relatively infrequent contact with her 
younger brother, cousin, and friend living in Taiwan as well as her younger sister living 
in Singapore. These relationships create a potential risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a close examination of all 
circumstances. The Government also identified minor concerns associated with 
Applicant’s limited assets in Taiwan. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and or obligation to his or her immediate family. 
ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 
(App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for 
and or obligation to her father and to a lesser extent with her siblings, cousin, and 
friend.  
 
Applicant’s family are not associated with or affiliated with the Taiwanese 
government. Her father is semi-retired, is in cancer remission, and spends most of his 
discretionary free time doing volunteer work. Her brother is a salesperson and her sister 
is an insurance agent. Both siblings are employed by private companies. The record 
does not identify what influence, if any, the Taiwanese government could exert on 
Applicant’s siblings as a result of their being resident citizens of Taiwan. However, their 
presence in Taiwan creates concerns under this Guideline. As such, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to show her relatives in Taiwan do not create security risks. 
  
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Taiwan,” Taiwan actively engages in intelligence 
gathering against the U.S.  
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one.  
 
9 
 
 
The evidence supports application of AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(f). Applicant is fully 
vested in the United States. She is married to a U.S.-born citizen and her children are 
U.S.-born citizens. Applicant has integrated into the U.S. way of life not only through her 
family, but also through her church and community involvement. Her assets in Taiwan 
are minimal when compared to her assets in the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to Taiwan. Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-
person analysis. First, and most importantly for security purposes, Taiwan actively 
seeks classified and industrial/economic information. Taiwan may attempt to use 
Applicant’s family members who live in Taiwan to obtain such information. In addition, 
Applicant spent her formative years in Taiwan. Applicant also maintains frequent 
contact with her father and to a lesser her two siblings, cousin, and friend. These 
contacts are manifestations of strong affection and regard Applicant has for family 
members in Taiwan.    
  
The mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant initially came to the United States in 1999, returned to Taiwan in 2003, and 
 
10 
 
 
came back to the United States again in 2005. Since returning to the United States in 
2005, she married her U.S.-born husband in 2006, received her “green card in 2007,” 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011, and received her U.S. passport that same 
year. She is the mother of two young U.S.-born children and embarked on a successful 
career. Applicant is a homeowner, is active in her community, and is a productive 
member of society. Her assets in the U.S. are far more substantial when contrasted to 
her minimal assets in Taiwan. Applicant’s ties to the United States are stronger than her 
ties to her family members in Taiwan. She has vested her life and future in the U.S. 
There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken any action that could cause potential 
harm to the United States. She takes her loyalty to the United States very seriously, and 
hopes to begin work for a contractor. The evidence contains no derogatory record 
evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan. Taiwan is a multi-
party democracy. There is no evidence that Taiwan uses coercion to obtain intelligence 
from U.S. residents. In the unlikely event that Applicant’s family in Taiwan was 
subjected to coercion or duress from the Taiwanese government in an attempt to obtain 
sensitive information, I find that because of her deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States, that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. Noteworthy is 
the affirmative and overt steps Applicant recently took to surrender her Taiwanese 
passport to her facility security officer. 
  
I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at her hearing, and 
I find her statements to be credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and 
the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
Applicant has carried her burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
