
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 
1, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on November 2, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 1, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1, which 
was admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant presented 11 
exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through K, which was admitted without 
objection, and testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on December 13, 2016. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to China. Department Counsel provided an eight-page summary of the 
facts, supported by ten Government documents pertaining to China, identified as HE I. 
The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegation ¶ 2.a. She denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2015. She immigrated to the United States 
in 2001. She acquired U.S. citizenship in 2010. She has a U.S. passport, which she has 
used to travel since obtaining U.S. citizenship. She is married to a naturalized U.S. 
citizen and has two children, who are both native-born U.S. citizens. (GE 1; AE D; Tr. 
23.) 
 
 Applicant was born in China. She earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s 
degree at Chinese universities. From 1992 to 1994, she attended a university in 
Australia and earned a doctorate from that university in 1996. She acquired Australian 
citizenship in May 1997. She was issued an Australian passport in December 2007, 
which will expire in December 2017. Applicant has relinquished that passport to her 
FSO and no longer has it in her possession, as documented by a letter from her FSO. 
(AE J.) She has not used her Australian passport since acquiring her U.S. citizenship, 
and does not intend to renew it. She signed a statement expressing that she will not 
exercise any privileges of dual citizenship while possessing a security clearance. (GE 1; 
AE C; AE E; Tr. 19-20, 24-26.) 
 
 At the age of one, Applicant’s maternal aunt (foster mother) and uncle (foster 
father) took her in as a foster child. Her foster mother is deceased and her foster father 
is 80 years old. He is a citizen and resident of China. He is retired from a position in a 
 
3 
 
private restaurant. He owns a home, valued at approximately $100,000, which Applicant 
stands to inherit. Applicant does not provide him financial support. He has no affiliation 
with the Chinese Government. He does not receive a pension from the Chinese 
Government. Applicant communicates with her foster father on a weekly basis by 
phone. They are close. (GE 1; Tr. 21, 27-29, 31-32, 36, 38, 42.) 
 
 Applicant’s birth family included her birth father, birth mother, and three sisters. 
Applicant’s birth mother is deceased. Her birth father is 75 years old, and retired from a 
job with the “local justice bureau.” He receives a pension from the Chinese Government. 
She claims he is not a member of the Communist Party. Applicant does not provide him 
financial support. He supplements his income by working in a restaurant owned by 
Applicant’s sister. He has not visited Applicant in the United States. Applicant 
communicates with him by telephone on holidays. (GE 1; Tr. 21-22, 29-31, 43.) 
 
 Applicant’s three sisters range in age from 50 to 54. Her older sister owns a 
private restaurant where her father works. Her middle sister works as an accountant for 
the restaurant. Her youngest sister is a nurse at a government run hospital. Applicant 
calls them on Chinese New Year. Applicant does not provide her sisters financial 
support. (GE 1; Tr. 33, 43-45.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is 81 years old. Applicant does not communicate with 
him. None of Applicant’s Chinese family members know what she does for a living. 
They do not know she has applied for a security clearance. (Tr. 21, 37.) 
 
 Applicant visited China from February to March 2009; in July 2009; in March 
2010; in September 2010; for two weeks in 2013; in November 2015; and in April 2016. 
She intends to visit China in the future, but has no specific travel dates planned. (GE 1; 
Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States, valued at $1.22 million. She did not 
state how much equity she has in the home. She reported she has retirement savings 
accounts. She has no assets in China. She votes in U.S. elections. She is active within 
her church community. She has a monthly remainder of $7,314, after expenses are 
paid. (AE F; AE G; AE H; Tr. 39-41.)  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations reflect she is a valued employee. (AE A.) 
She received several awards from her former employer, including “Outstanding 
Employee of the Year” in 2012. (AE B.) Those that wrote letters of recommendation on 
Applicant’s behalf indicate she is honest, reliable, and trustworthy. (AE I.)  
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning China, which are incorporated herein by reference.  
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
 
4 
 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. It has a poor 
record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic intelligence. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security. In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone 
conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet 
communications. Authorities open and censor mail. Its security services have entered 
personal residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
machines. All major hotels have a sizable internal security presence, and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. 
There are several recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage, as well as the 
illegal export of information to China. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
  Applicant was a dual citizen of the United States and Australia. She possessed a 
valid Australian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant surrendered her Australian passport to her FSO. AG ¶ 11(e) provides 
mitigation with respect to this guideline.  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
China is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information, and has a 
significant interest in acquiring defense-related and other technology. While there is no 
evidence that intelligence operatives from China seek or have sought classified or 
economic information from or through Applicant or her family, nevertheless, it is not 
prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. Applicant’s relationship with her foster 
father, birth father, father-in-law, and three sisters creates substantial potential for 
conflict of interest. Those circumstances could place Applicant in a position of having to 
choose between family members residing in China, a country that generates a 
heightened risk of coercion, and the United States. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
potential security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), and 7(b). The Government met its burden 
of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden to 
Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not have application under the facts in this case. Applicant’s 
foster father, birth father, father-in law, and three sisters are citizens and residents of 
China. The family’s physical presence in that country creates a heightened potential for 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, as there is strong 
evidence of China’s human rights abuses toward citizens and residents. Thus, 
Applicant’s family interests could be threatened to the point that she would confront a 
choice between their interests and those of the United States should adverse forces 
learn of Applicant’s work for the U.S. Government.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that 
she “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” She 
has lived in the United States since 2001 and became a citizen in 2010. Her husband is 
a naturalized U.S. citizen, and her two children are U.S. citizens. She has successfully 
worked for her employer for the past two years. She has economic ties to the United 
States, including a financial interest in real estate, and retirement savings. While those 
factors weigh in Applicant’s favor, she maintains strong ties to her Chinese foster father, 
and to a lesser extent her birth father and sisters.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) provides mitigation with respect to her father-in-law. She testified she 
has no communications with him. It does not provide mitigation for the security concerns 
raised with respect to her foster father, birth father, or sisters. Applicant maintains 
regular contact with her foster father. She has some contact with her birth father and 
sisters. All of these people are citizens and residents of China. She visits her family 
members in China regularly. These contacts have been sufficiently frequent that they 
cannot be construed as casual or infrequent.  
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. She is an intelligent, 
articulate, and hardworking person, who has lived in the United States for approximately 
16 years. Her husband and two children are U.S. citizens and residents. She owns her 
home and has retirement accounts in the United States. She no longer holds a valid 
Australian passport. 
 
Four circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis. First, 
Applicant had numerous connections to China before she immigrated to the United 
States in 2001. She spent her formative years there and earned a bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees at a Chinese university. Second, Applicant’s foster father, birth father, 
sisters and father-in-law are citizens and residents of China. Third, China is a known 
collector of U.S. technological and economic information. Fourth, and more importantly 
for security purposes, the Chinese government is hostile to the United States and 
actively seeks classified information. The Chinese government could attempt to use 
Applicant’s family members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s 
responsibilities to the United States.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
