 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00145 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 10, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on May 2, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 6, 2016. Applicant’s June 2016 response is marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017. The 
Government documents identified as Items 1 through 8 and AE 1 are admitted in 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since January 2015. He obtained a high-school diploma in 2008, 
and a bachelor’s degree in 2012. He attended classes towards a master’s degree from 
August to December 2014. He worked on a U.S. military base from November 2010 
through August 2012, and for a prior defense contractor from January 2013 to January 
2015. He was granted a DOD security clearance in August 2014. As of February 2015, 
he had never married and had no children.1   
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs from 2007 to early 2015. He used marijuana from 
approximately 2007 to 2012, LSD in approximately 2012 and 2014, and hallucinogenic 
mushrooms in approximately 2012, 2014, and 2015. He used illegal drugs after he was 
granted a DOD security clearance in August 2014. He also purchased illegal drugs. He 
purchased marijuana between 2008 and 2010, and hallucinogenic mushrooms in 2012. 
As of his February 2016 response to interrogatories, Applicant’s roommate used 
marijuana.2   
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to report his use and purchase of illegal drugs on 
two Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in 
March 2014 and February 2015.3 Above his signature, he certified: 
 
My statements on this form, and on any attachments to it, are true, 
complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are 
made in good faith. . . . I understand that a knowing and willful false 
statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both 
(18 U.S.C 1001). I understand that intentionally withholding, 
misrepresenting, or falsifying information may have a negative effect on 
my security clearance, employment prospects, or job status, up to and 
including denial or revocation of my security clearance, or my removal and 
debarment from Federal service.4   
                                                          
1 Items 5-8; AE 1.  
 
2 Items 1, 4-8; AE 1.  
 
3 Items 1, 4-8; AE 1. While not alleged in the SOR, Applicant also intentionally failed to report his illegal 
marijuana use in response to section 14 of the SF 86 that he submitted in January 2011. Applicant stated 
that he believed that he would not be able to get a job if he admitted to smoking marijuana. Items 5-8; AE 
1.  
 
4 Items 1, 4-7; AE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation on May 8, 2015. 
During that interview, Applicant indicated that he had not illegally used or purchased 
any drug or controlled substance. He subsequently telephoned the background 
investigator on May 11, 2015, and indicated that he was not entirely truthful on his prior 
SF 86s and during his prior interview, and wanted to “clear the air” in person. When he 
was interviewed on May 13, 2015, he voluntarily disclosed his use and purchase of 
illegal drugs. He stated that he last used illegal drugs in September 2014. In his 
February 2016 response to interrogatories, Applicant stated that he last used illegal 
drugs in early 2015 and thought he had reported such during his May 13, 2015 
interview.5  
 
 Applicant indicated in his May 13, 2015 interview, and June 2016 response to the 
FORM, that he did not report his use and purchase of illegal drugs on his prior SF 86s 
because he was terrified of not getting his security clearance and losing his job.6 
Applicant stated in his June 2016 response to the FORM that after his May 8, 2015 
interview: 
 
The next morning, around 2:00 A.M. on Saturday, I called my father telling 
him what I did and how I have lied. I was terrified of the consequences but 
I did not want the skeleton in my closet anymore. I told him I wanted to 
confess but was scared. During that talk, I realized that the only way for 
me to move forward and to not be afraid of my past, was to confess to 
everything.  
 
After he received the SOR, Applicant stated that he informed his FSO and manager and 
confessed to them about his past.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
5 Items 4-8; AE 1. 
 
6 Items 4-8; AE 1. 
 
7 AE 1. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;8  
 
                                                          
8 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
  
 Applicant used illegal drugs from 2007 to early 2015. He used illegal drugs after 
he was granted a DOD security clearance in August 2014. Applicant also purchased 
illegal drugs between 2008 and 2012. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana or purchased illegal drugs since 2012. 
However, his drug involvement continued when he used LSD in 2012 and late 2014, 
and hallucinogenic mushrooms in 2012, 2014, and early 2015. He held a DOD security 
clearance when he used LSD in 2014, and hallucinogenic mushrooms in 2014 and 
2015. As of February 2016, Applicant’s roommate used marijuana. Applicant has not 
demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence from illegal drug use, or that the use 
and purchase of illegal drugs are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are not 
applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
6 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States any may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant used illegal drugs from 2007 to early 2015. He used illegal drugs after 
he was granted a DOD security clearance in August 2014. Applicant also purchased 
illegal drugs between 2008 and 2012. Applicant intentionally provided false information 
about his use and purchase of illegal drugs on his SF 86s from March 2014 and 
February 2015. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e) are applicable.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; (g) association with 
persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under such 
circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations.  
 
7 
 
 Applicant corrected his false SF 86s from March 2014 and February 2015 during 
his background interview on March 13, 2015, and in his February 2016 response to 
interrogatories. He stated that he did not report his use and purchase of illegal drugs on 
his SF 86s because he was terrified of not getting his security clearance and losing his 
job.  
 
 The corrections were not prompt, but Applicant is credited with disclosing the 
information to the investigator and in his response to interrogatories. AG ¶ 17(a) is 
partially applicable. After he received the SOR, Applicant stated that he informed his 
FSO and manager and confessed to them about his past. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable. 
Notwithstanding, I have continuing concerns. Applicant’s overall use of illegal drugs 
spans an eight-year period. His last use of illegal drugs occurred in early 2015. He used 
illegal drugs while holding a DOD security clearance. As of February 2016, his 
roommate used marijuana. Further, Applicant certified that he was aware that he was 
committing a criminal offense punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, and that 
falsifying information could cause him to be denied a security clearance and lose his 
job. Despite those certifications, he decided to falsify his SF 86s. I am unable to 
determine that the conduct is unlikely to recur. It continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(g) 
are not applicable. I find that personal conduct security concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 
8 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs between 2007 and 2015, purchased illegal drugs 
between 2008 and 2012, and then lied about it on his SF 86s because he was afraid it 
could affect his job. Self-reporting is a fundamental requirement for clearance holders. I 
am concerned that he may again choose to lie to protect his job.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
