 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02367 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant rebutted the falsification allegation under Guideline E, personal conduct, 
but failed to demonstrate that she has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant initially answered the SOR on October 10, 2016, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. She submitted a second, more 
complete answer on October 26, 2016. On December 16, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The Government submitted 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant received the FORM on January 4, 
2017. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant’s undated FORM response was received 
by DOHA on or about January 9, 2017.1 She did not object to the Government’s evidence. 
Items 1, 2 and 3 are the pleadings in the case. Items 4 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant’s FORM response is marked Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AE) A and is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
April 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations but for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.d, with 
explanations. I have incorporated her answers and relevant comments into the findings 
of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 64 years old. She and her husband have been married since 1970. 
They have one adult daughter. Since at least 2003, she has worked for a variety of 
companies as a long-haul truck driver making deliveries nationwide. She has had the 
same employer, a federal contractor, since April 2015.2   
  
 Applicant was seriously injured in an accident in November 2011 when her leg was 
run over by the truck, driven by her husband. She was hospitalized for about six weeks, 
and underwent numerous surgeries. In July 2013, she had both knees replaced. In 
October 2013, she and her husband were in a roll-over accident. She was again 
hospitalized, with broken ribs and other serious injuries. Her husband subsequently lost 
his job, and Applicant was unable to return to work until March 2014.3 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in September 2015. 
She disclosed that she filed her 2014 state income tax return late and owed $900 in past- 
due state taxes (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and b), as well as a large delinquent credit card (SOR ¶ 1.d), 
and stated she was making payments on both.4  
   
 Applicant has numerous other delinquent debts, all set forth on credit reports from 
September 2015 and June 2016, and alleged in the SOR. The SOR debts total about 
                                                          
1 In AE A, Applicant provided updated information about each SOR allegation, along with a copy of the 
Government’s FORM and two of its attachments, but she provided no documents of her own.   
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Item 4.  
 
 
3 
 
 
$30,741. Most of the debts she had accrued by the fall of 2015 are medical accounts and 
consumer debts.5 More recent debts include a past-due home mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c).6  
 
Applicant did not disclose that she had any other delinquent debts on her SCA, 
beyond the tax debt and the single credit card account. In answering SOR ¶ 2.a, Applicant 
states, in part, “I wasn’t trying to be smart or disrespectful to anyone. I answered the best 
that I could.”7  I construe her answer as a denial to the Guideline E allegation that she 
deliberately failed to disclose the full extent of her delinquencies on her SCA.  
 
 Applicant denies failing to file her 2014 state income tax return as required, and 
denies owing the state $900 in past-due taxes (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The allegation is 
supported by her own disclosure of the matter on her SCA and in her background 
interview.8 She states the debt has been paid in full, and was resolved when the state 
kept a portion of her “return” (i.e., refund) this year. This statement is not supported by 
corroborating documentation. However, it is consistent with Applicant’s statements on her 
SCA and in her interview, in which she states that due to a job loss, she filed her 2014 
state tax return in April 2015 (which, if true, means if the filing was late at all it would have 
been late by a few weeks at most)) and entered into a $100-a-month payment plan.9 
Applicant’s tax issues are limited to the 2014 tax year. Though her answers are 
unsupported by documentation, I nonetheless find them credible.  
 
Applicant also denies SOR ¶ 1.d, though she reported it as delinquent on her SCA. 
The debt is listed as charged off on her June 2016 credit report. Applicant states that the 
debt was refinanced and closed. This answer is unsupported by documentation. Applicant 
provides insufficient evidence that this debt is being resolved.  
 
 Applicant admits SOR ¶ 1.c, a past-due mortgage loan for $13,072. She says the 
loan matured in March 2015, and that she has been paying $700 every other week on 
the debt. In AE A, she states that she now owes $8,800 on the debt and is in settlement 
discussions with the creditor. These answers are unsupported by documentation. 
Applicant provides insufficient evidence that this debt is being resolved. 
 
 Applicant admits the remaining debts. These include various consumer and utility 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.m, 1.o, 1.u, 1.v, and 1.aa) and medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.h- 
1.l, 1.n, 1.p-1.t, and 1.x-1.z). Most of the medical debts are not specifically identified in 
the SOR, though some of them have named collection agencies in the credit reports.10 
                                                          
5 Item 6.  
 
6 Items 6, 7.  
 
7 Item 3.  
 
8 Items 4, 5.  
 
9 Id. 
  
10 Items 2, 3, 6, 7.  
 
4 
 
 
She explains that her debts resulted from her various surgeries and medical procedures. 
Her resulting time away from work, and her husband’s job loss both impacted their 
finances and their ability to pay the debts.  
 
Applicant is contesting SOR ¶ 1.e (a $2,295 debt to a phone company). She says 
she is making $99 monthly payments on SOR ¶ 1.f ($588). She indicates that she has a 
list of her medical debts and is paying the smaller ones first, though she provides no 
specifics or documentation. She states that SOR ¶ 1.aa ($126) has been paid. She has 
contacted several of her other creditors in an attempt to negotiate payments. She 
provides no documents concerning these efforts. She also provides no documentation 
about her monthly income and expenses.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
 
11  AE A.  
 
5 
 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns, or the 
fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.a, concerning her failure to file her 2014 state income 
tax return. Applicant disclosed that she filed the return in April 2015, acknowledging that 
she owed about $900 in past-due taxes. Applicant’s federal and state income tax returns 
for tax year 2014 would have been due on or about April 15, 2015 – the same month 
Applicant has stated that she filed her 2014 state return. Although this return is not in the 
record, I cannot find that the Government has met its burden of establishing that AG ¶ 
19(g) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 Applicant’s various delinquent debts are established by the record. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). 
 
Applicant’s $900 state tax debt has been paid. I resolve SOR ¶ 1.b for Applicant.  
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.w are the same debts. I resolve SOR ¶ 1.w for Applicant since it is a 
duplicate.13 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began after she was seriously injured in two truck 
accidents, in 2011 and 2013, leading to multiple surgeries and causing her to miss work 
while recovering for a significant period of time. During her second recovery period, her 
husband also lost his job, in 2014. These are all circumstances beyond her control. The 
first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. However, for the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must provide evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She has not 
provided sufficient evidence of responsible action. For some of her debts, she indicates 
                                                          
13 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice). 
 
7 
 
 
that the debt is resolved, but she has not provided corroborating documentation.14 For 
most of her debts, Applicant has not set forth a realistic plan for resolving them. The 
second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and not isolated. There is insufficient 
evidence that her financial issues are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant provides no evidence of financial counseling. She provides no evidence 
of her monthly income and expenses. Without additional evidence, there are not clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant indicates that she is making payments on some of her debts, and looking 
into others. She has not provided corroborating documentation of any payments she has 
made. She has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that she has a reasonable 
plan to resolve her debts, or that she has taken steps towards establishing a reliable 
financial track record. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant disclosed a past-due tax debt and a $9,843 delinquent debt on her SCA. 
She did not disclose other delinquent debts. The information she provided about her 
finances, however, is sufficient to rebut the allegation of deliberate falsification. Applicant 
                                                          
14 It is reasonable to expect Applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts. 
ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
8 
 
 
did not intentionally provide false information on her SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. 
SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant.15 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old truck driver. Her financial problems began several years 
ago after she was seriously injured in two truck accidents, resulting in multiple surgeries 
and time away from work. She did not intend to falsify her SCA concerning her finances. 
She has not shown sufficient corroborating documentary evidence that she has 
undertaken responsible action to pay or otherwise resolve her delinquencies, which are 
ongoing. Applicant does not have a reliable financial track record at this time. Her finances 
remain a security concern. She has failed to meet her burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant rebutted the Guideline 
E personal conduct security concern but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 In addition, Applicant’s home loan (SOR ¶ 1.c) was current in September 2015, though it later became 
past due. Item 6 at 4; Item 7 at 1. Thus, its reference in Guideline E SOR ¶ 2.a as a delinquent debt that 
Applicant should have disclosed on her September 2015 SCA is not supported by the record. 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.v:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph   1.w:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.x-1.aa:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
