 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02165 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 14, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s 
exhibits (AE) A through Q. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Venezuela. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. I have also 
considered facts from the U.S. State Department’s official website regarding a current 
travel advisory. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The Government moved to amend the SOR by adding a second brother to SOR 
¶ 1.a. There was no objection and the motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He was born in Venezuela. He has a bachelor’s and a 
master’s degree. He married in 2004 and has two children, ages nine and ten, who 
were born in the United States. He also has a 19-year-old stepchild who is married. 
Applicant became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2014. Applicant has 
worked for different government contractors since about 2006.1 
 
Applicant came to the United States in 1994 on a student visa. His parents 
provided him financial support from 1994 to about 2004 while he was a student and until 
he obtained a steady job. He returned to Venezuela five times while a student. His last 
trip was in 2004 to visit his parents and siblings. His parents, brother, half-brother, some 
uncles, aunts, and other relatives traveled to his wife’s country of origin for their 
wedding celebration. Applicant estimated about 30 relatives traveled. Applicant 
maintained a Venezuelan passport until he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. 
His Venezuelan passport is expired and he has no plans to renew it.2  
 
Applicant voted in the Venezuelan elections in 1998 and again 2013 because he 
felt it was his civic duty. He voted at the Venezuelan consulate in the United States. He 
does not own property in Venezuela and has not served in its military. He owns two 
houses in the United States, one is his primary residence and the other is a rental 
                                                          
1 Tr. 24-27, 31-33, 37-44, 98. 
 
2 Tr. 24-29, 92-99. 
 
3 
 
 
property. He participates in his employer’s retirement plan and has other savings 
accounts.3  
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Venezuela. His father served as 
mayor of a city in Venezuela for three years in the 1990s.4 Applicant testified that being 
the mayor was a significant political position. He is now a professor at a private 
university. Applicant was living in Venezuela when his father was mayor. He is unaware 
of his father’s current political affiliation or if he belongs to a political party. Applicant did 
not know if his father worked for the Venezuelan Government in the past. He does not 
know if his father receives a pension or other government benefits. He does not know 
why his father was involved in politics. He is aware that his parents have assets in 
Venezuela, but does not know if they own real property.  
 
Applicant has visited with his family in the United States in December 2011 for a 
family reunion, at a wedding in 2014, and his father visited him in 2015. In December 
2016, Applicant’s parents, brother, sister, niece and her child all visited him and his 
family in the United States. His brother and sister who reside in the United States were 
also present. Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application (SCA) that he 
and his father attempt to see each other every other year.5 He testified that he has 
contact with his father about every four months.6  
 
Applicant testified that his father is well known in Venezuela and is interviewed 
on television and the radio. Applicant is unaware of the subject of the interviews and 
does not know if his father is outspoken about social issues.  
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Venezuela. She is retired, but 
previously worked in human resources at a university. Applicant testified that she is not 
involved in politics. He has weekly contact with her either by telephone or by texting. 
She visits Applicant annually to see her grandchildren and stays for several weeks. He 
will also FaceTime with his mother about once a month. Both parents and his siblings 
are aware of Applicant’s employment and that he is seeking a security clearance. They 
live in a guarded gated community due to the high crime rate.7  
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Venezuela. He is a professor at a 
private university. Applicant has contact with him about once a year. He sees him every 
                                                          
3 Tr. 29-31, 33-35, 84. 
 
4 I have intentionally not mentioned the city or the years due to privacy issues. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 60-62, 76-85, 88, 92, 99, 102; AE L. 
 
7 Tr. 36, 44-48, 87, 99, 101. 
 
 
4 
 
 
two years when his brother visits in the United States. He last saw him during the 
December 2016 family visit.8  
 
Applicant has another brother and sister who reside in the U.S. He is uncertain of 
this brother’s status, but believes he is a permanent resident. He thinks his brother has 
been in the United States for over ten years and intends on remaining. His sister has 
resided in the United States for 23 years and is a naturalized citizen. Applicant has 
regular contact with his sister who keeps him apprised about his brother in the U.S.9  
 
Applicant has a half-brother who is a citizen and resident of Venezuela. He is 
Applicant’s mother’s son from a prior marriage. Applicant has not had any contact with 
him since 2004 when Applicant was in Venezuela.10  
 
Applicant has numerous aunts, uncles, cousins and other extended family 
members who are citizens and residents of Venezuela. He has contact with some of 
them once or twice a year by email. Others he has no contact. He has some relatives 
who are living in different countries that he contacts sporadically. Applicant also has 
other relatives who live in the U.S. and are permanent residents. Applicant maintains 
some contact with many of these relatives through a cell phone application. There was 
a group message on the application and many of his relatives were part of the group. 
Applicant discontinued his participation in the group messaging about a year ago 
because he explained he was getting too many text messages. He was also concerned 
his contact with those in the group might affect his eligibility for a security clearance. 
With many of his relatives, he used social media to contact them in the past. Since he 
no longer is part of the group, he does not have contact with many of them. Applicant 
testified that some extended family members from Venezuela come to visit him in the 
United States.11  
 
Applicant has no current plans to return to Venezuela. He testified that 
Venezuela’s economy has had negative financial effect on all of the people. He does 
not send his family money.12  
 
Applicant provided numerous character letters and awards. He provided 
information about his financial resources in the U.S. and the professional recognition he 
has received. He provided copies of heritage and leadership awards. Applicant is 
                                                          
8 Tr. 47-49, 85. 
 
9 Tr. 52-56. 
 
10 Tr. 49-51, 87. 
 
11 Tr. 56-76, 86, 89-90. 
 
12 Tr. 47, 82, 88-89. 
 
 
5 
 
 
described as dedicated, hardworking, professional, helpful, ethical, trustworthy, friendly, 
and kind. He is a person of integrity and high moral character.13  
 
Venezuela14 
 
 Venezuela’s political power has been concentrated in a single party for more 
than ten years with an increasingly authoritarian executive exercising significant control 
over the legislature, judicial, and electoral branches of government. Its past and current 
president have defined themselves in part through their opposition to the United States, 
regularly criticizing the U.S. government, its policies, and its relations with Latin 
America. In the past, the U.S. Department of State determined that Venezuela was not 
cooperating fully with the U.S. antiterrorism effort. There were credible reports that 
Venezuela maintained a permissive environment that allowed for support of activities 
that benefited known terrorist groups. Individuals linked to known terrorist groups were 
present in Venezuela, as well as supporters and sympathizers and have used 
Venezuela as a safe haven. The U.S. has an embargo against Venezuela for its failure 
to cooperate in the areas of counterterrorism.  
 
In response to the Venezuelan military’s violent repression of its people, the U.S. 
Department of Commerce imposed licensing requirements on certain items to or within 
Venezuela intended for military end use.  
 
In 2015, the United States determined Venezuela had failed demonstratively to 
adhere to its obligations under international counternarcotic agreements. The 
Venezuelan Government has engaged in minimal bilateral law enforcement cooperation 
with the United States. Venezuelan authorities do not effectively prosecute drug 
traffickers, in part due to political corruption. In 2016, the United States indicted top 
leaders of Venezuela’s Anti-Narcotic Agency for trafficking drugs in the United States.  
 
In 2016, the U.S. Department of State called for the release of those imprisoned 
for their political beliefs. The Venezuelan government continues to block efforts by 
international organizations to visit political prisoners and provide essential services.  
 
Venezuela has one of the world’s highest crime rates and the second highest 
homicide rate. Violent crime, including murder, armed robbery, kidnapping, and 
carjacking is endemic throughout the country. Recent travel advisories by the U.S. State 
Department warn U.S. citizens against travel to Venezuela due to violent crime, social 
unrest, and pervasive food and medicine shortages. The political and security situation 
in Venezuela is unpredictable and can change quickly.  
 
 
                                                          
13 AE A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, M, N, O, P, and Q. 
 
14 HE I and II; https://travel.state.gov/content/passports/en/alertswarnings/venezuela-travel-warning.html 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
 
8 
 
 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”15 
 
The United States has concerns about Venezuela’s increasingly authoritarian 
executive exercising significant control over the legislature, judicial, and electoral 
branches of government. In addition, the United States has serious concerns about 
Venezuela’s failure to cooperate fully with the U.S. antiterrorism effort and adhere to its 
obligations under international counternarcotic agreements. The U.S. State Department 
called for the release of those imprisoned for their political beliefs. The Venezuelan 
government continues to block efforts by international organizations to visit political 
prisoners and provide essential services. Venezuela has one of the world’s highest 
crime rates and has the second highest homicide rate. Violent crime, including murder, 
armed robbery, kidnapping, and carjacking is endemic throughout the country.  
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, and numerous relatives are citizens and residents of 
Venezuela. He has regular contact with his parents and brother, and some contact with 
his extended family living in Venezuela. His parents and brother visit him in the United 
States, as do some other family members, many of whom attended his wedding in his 
wife’s native country.  
 
Applicant’s has ongoing close relationships with his parents, brother, and some 
relatives who are citizens and residents of Venezuela. Applicant’s father is a former 
mayor, and is a public figure. The media interview him. Applicant is unfamiliar with  his 
father’s political party or affiliation. Applicant’s contacts with his family members in 
Venezuela create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. The evidence has 
raised AG ¶¶ 7(a).  
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant maintains regular contact with his parents, brother, and some relatives 
who are citizens and residents of Venezuela. His contacts cannot be characterized as 
casual or infrequent. AG¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
Venezuela’s tenuous relationship with the United States, its political power being 
concentrated in an authoritarian executive, its high crime rate, to include murder and 
kidnapping, among other factors as articulated above creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure and coercion due to Applicant’s 
close familial relations in that country. There is a concern that Applicant could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interest of family members in Venezuela 
and that of the United States. Applicant’s father’s past position as mayor of a city and as 
a public figure enhances these concerns, and increase the heightened risk. The fact 
that Applicant is unfamiliar with his father’s political affiliations or contact with the 
Venezuelan Government increases the security concern. His parents are aware of his 
job and his application for a security clearance. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of his family and the interests of the U.S. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for many years and is raising his family 
here. He does not have assets in Venezuela. Applicant voted in the 1998 and the more 
recent 2013 Venezuelan elections. He only recently became a U.S. citizen in 2014. As 
expected of a devoted son and brother, he has maintained contact with his parents and 
brother who live in Venezuela and visit him regularly. He maintains some contact with 
other family members in Venezuela. Under the circumstances, there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S. that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 39 years old and became a naturalized citizen in 2014. He is raising 
his family in the United States and has worked for federal contractors since 2006. 
Applicant maintains strong family ties with his parents and brother, who are residents 
and citizens of Venezuela along with many extended family members. He voted in the 
1998 and 2013 Venezuelan elections. His father is a former mayor and public figure in 
Venezuela. His parents are aware of his job and that he is applying for a security 
clearance. Although I do not question Applicant’s loyalty to the United States, I find that 
his strong family ties in Venezuela create an insurmountable burden for him, should a 
conflict of interest arise if he were placed in a position of having to choose between his 
family’s interests and the interests of the United States. Therefore, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
foreign influence guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
