 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02988 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 20, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge, but was assigned to me on March 8, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 25, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for March 14, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which were admitted. Applicant 
offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A, testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
The record was left open until April 14, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. 
 
2 
 
Applicant presented one document, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppX) B. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 21, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to both Afghanistan and Ukraine. Department Counsel provided a five- 
page summary of the facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to 
Afghanistan, identified as AppX 5.  Department Counsel also provided a five page 
summary of the facts, supported by three Government documents pertaining to Ukraine, 
identified as AppX 6. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I 
take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They 
are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are 
set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all three allegations of the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old “Cultural Advisor/Linguist,” serving with U.S. Forces in 
Afghanistan.  (TR at page 19 lines 1~10.) He has served in this capacity since 2011.  
(RTR at page 19 lines 11~20.)  He has had a security clearance since 2011. (Id.) He is 
married to a U.S. citizen, and has three native-born American children.  (TR at page 29 
lines 4~14, and GX 1 at pages 23~25.) 
 
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan.  (TR at page 19 line 21 to page 20 line 4.)  As 
a 16 year old, he was sent to the former Soviet Union to further his education.  (TR at 
page 20 lines 5~25.) He initially went to St. Petersburg “to learn English.”  (TR at page 
21 lines 10~22.)  After that, in 1990, he was “transferred to Kharkov, which is [in the] 
Ukraine.”  (Id.)  He stayed in the Ukraine “until 1999.”  (TR at page 21 lines 21~22.) 
There, he married his American wife, and moved to the United States to be with her in 
1999.  (TR at page 26 line 18 to page 27 line 17.)  Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 
2013.  (TR at page 27 line 18 to page 28 line 16.) 
 
 1.a.  Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.  (TR at page 29 
line 25 to page 31 line 9.)  “Her petition to come to the United States” has been 
approved.” (Id.)  “She is a housewife.”  (TR at page 30 lines 11~14.)  He provides 
financial support to his mother in the amount of “$200 a month.”  (TR at page 37 line 10 
to page 38 line 17.) 
 
 1.b.  Applicant’s brother is also a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.  (TR at 
page 31 lines 10~15.)  He is a lieutenant colonel with the Afghan Armed Forces.  (Id.)  
“He trains Afghan soldiers to become” non-commissioned officers (NCOs).  (TR at page 
31 line 16 to page 32 line 10.)  Applicant’s brother works closely with the U.S. Forces in 
Afghanistan as evidenced by four “Certificates of Appreciation,” and a Letter of 
 
3 
 
Commendation, from the U.S. Forces in Afghanistan.  (Answer, at pages 4~8.)  This 
brother hopes to immigrate to the United States, where his married daughter lives with 
her American husband.  (TR at page 32 lines 8~16.) 
 
 1.c.  Applicant has a 26-year-old son by a Ukrainian women, who is a citizen and 
resident of the Ukraine.  (TR at page 21 line 12 to page 23 line 6.)  He has little contact 
with this “Computer Technician” son, with whom he last spoke “four years ago.”  (TR at 
page 38 line 19 to page 39 line 6.)  Applicant’s wife is aware of the existence of his 
Ukrainian son, as evidenced by a letter from his wife.  (AppX B.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Afghanistan and the 
Ukraine.  As to Afghanistan, a U.S. State Department Travel Warning remains in effect.  
Extremists are active throughout the country.  The situation in Afghanistan remains 
precarious.  (AppX 5 at pages 2~4.) 
 
 As to the Ukraine, there is an ongoing struggle with Russia, which has seized 
Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula and which supports pro-Russian forces operating in 
Eastern Ukraine.  The situation in Ukraine also remains precarious.  (AppX 6 at pages 
3~4.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
   
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
5 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant‘s housewife mother and brother are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan, and his illegitimate son lives in the Ukraine. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8 (a), 8(b), and 8 (c) apply, and are mitigating.  Applicant‘s mother will 
soon be immigrating to the United States, and his Afghan Armed Forces brother, who 
works closely with the U.S. effort in Afghanistan, hopes to also immigrate to the United 
States to be closer to his American daughter.  As to his illegitimate Ukrainian son, 
Applicant has little contact with him.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has distinguished himself in his service with the U.S. forces in 
Afghanistan.  This is evidenced by letters of support from two U.S. Marine Corps 
(USMC) generals, two USMC colonels, a U.S. Army colonel, two USMC lieutenant 
colonels, and a U.S. Army lieutenant colonel.  (AppX A.)  A USMC master sergeant also 
testified on Applicant’s behalf.  (TR at page 41 line 12 to page 46 line 12.)  His wife and 
children are U.S. citizens residing in the United States.  I find that Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his 
continuing service to the U.S. forces in Afghanistan, and due to his family ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
