 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 04-08651 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 2, 2006. 
On May 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 9, 2008; answered it on 
June 24, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received 
the request on June 25, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 17, 
2008, and the case was assigned an administrative judge on July 23, 2008. It was 
reassigned to me on July 25, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 29, 2008, 
scheduling the hearing for August 27, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
E, which were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the 
hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 11, 2008. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 On my own motion, I amended the SOR to correct Applicant’s name by adding 
the suffix, “Jr.” (Tr. 45-46).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline H 
and denied the allegations of falsification under Guideline E. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old engineer/scientist employed by a federal contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since February 2002. He worked for another 
federal contractor from January 1997 to February 2002. He received a security 
clearance in February 1998, and it was revoked in February 2003 because of delinquent 
debts (GX 3 at 7; Tr. 44). 
 
 On July 21, 2004, at about 6:00 p.m., Applicant was stopped by police because 
he was driving well below the speed limit and weaving across the center line of the 
road. The officer told Applicant he would issue him a warning. As the officer was writing 
the warning, he asked Applicant about his trip. He noticed that Applicant was extremely 
nervous, spoke so rapidly he was not understandable, and visibly agitated. The officer 
gave Applicant his warning and told him he was free to leave.  
 
As Applicant was returning to his car, the officer asked him several more 
questions about his travel plans. He advised Applicant that he was driving on a highway 
where contraband traffic was heavy. He asked Applicant if he had any guns, knives, 
drugs or large sums of money in the car. When he asked Applicant if he had any 
cocaine, Applicant hesitated and then said no. The officer asked Applicant if he would 
consent to a search of his car, and Applicant declined. At some point thereafter, 
Applicant was handcuffed and placed in the police car (Tr. 60-61).  
 
The officer summoned a canine team, and it arrived at 7:35 p.m. When the 
canine alerted, the police searched Applicant’s car and found a baggy of 
methamphetamine in the center console of the front seat. Applicant was advised of his 
 
3 
 
 
rights and questioned. He admitted the substance was methamphetamine, he had 
purchased it for $20 on that morning, and that he had already used about half of it. He 
was released at about 8:20 p.m., about two and a half hours after he was initially 
stopped. (GX 6 at 1-5).  
 
 In October 2004, the local prosecutor charged Applicant with possession of a 
dangerous drug and possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia. Both offenses 
were charged as felonies (GX 5 at 2). A summons was issued in November 2004, and 
an arrest warrant was issued in December 2004 (GX 7). The certificate of service on the 
summons reflects it was mailed to Applicant’s home address on November 17, 2005 by 
certified mail, return receipt requested; but there is no return receipt in the record (GX 4 
at 7). The certificate of execution on the arrest warrant is blank (GX 4 at 6).  
 
 When Applicant submitted his e-QIP in March 2006, he disclosed two shoplifting 
arrests that were disposed of by adult diversion. In response to the question about prior 
arrests, however, he did not disclose the July 2004 incident. He also did not disclose it 
during an interview with a security investigator on May 29, 2007 (GX 9; Tr. 32-35). The 
investigator discovered the record of the incident after this interview. 
 
During another interview with a different security investigator on July 30, 2007, 
Applicant told the investigator he did not disclose the July 2004 incident on his e-QIP 
because it was his understanding he was not arrested or charged with any crime. 
Applicant stated he had heard nothing from law enforcement officials about the incident. 
He also told the investigator he did not disclose the incident because he did not think it 
would “come up” during his security investigation, and he was afraid he would not 
receive a clearance if it were disclosed (GX 3 at 11). At the hearing, he admitted he 
intentionally omitted the information (Tr. 66).  
 
 In March 2008, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories and disclosed a 
one-time use of methamphetamine in July 2007, and he stated he did not purchase it 
(GX 3 at 3). At the hearing, he admitted his answers to the interrogatories were false 
(Tr. 70). 
 
Regarding the source of the methamphetamine, Applicant told the second 
investigator a friend had given him the methamphetamine, and he had snorted one line 
of it about an hour before he began driving (GX 3 at 10). In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated he could not remember if he bought the methamphetamine or it was 
given to him.  
 
 Applicant retained an attorney after he learned about the charges arising from 
the July 2004 incident. He entered an initial appearance on April 16, 2008, represented 
by counsel (GX 5 at 3-4). He was advised of the charges, ordered to be fingerprinted, 
and released. (GX 5 at 5).  
 
On May 27, 2008, Applicant offered a plea agreement providing for pleas of guilty 
and entry into a drug offender treatment program. In return for successful completion of 
 
4 
 
 
the treatment program, the agreement provides for dismissal of the charge of 
possessing a dangerous drug, reducing the charge of possessing drug paraphernalia 
from a felony to a misdemeanor, and a fine of $100 plus costs (AX B). 
 
Applicant completed the comprehensive evaluation and drug screening phase of 
his treatment, and he began weekly group therapy on June 17, 2008 (AX C and D). He 
will not complete his treatment program until December 2008 (Tr. 72). 
 
Applicant testified he started using methamphetamine sometime before 
September 2001, initially using it on weekends, and then progressing to daily use (Tr. 
53-55). He admitted purchasing it on more than one occasion (Tr. 61). He last used 
methamphetamine in July 2004.  
 
Applicant testified he no longer uses drugs or consumes alcohol. He has moved 
across the country to a new job, no longer associates with old friends, and is attending 
church regularly. In April 2008, he was given custody of his nine-year-old daughter, to 
whom he is very devoted (AX A). He is a single parent. A friend who has known him for 
20 years believes Applicant is now focused on the welfare of his daughter and has put 
himself on the right path toward a productive life (AX E). 
.  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges a single arrest on July 21, 2004, for felony possession of a 
dangerous drug and felony use or possession of drug paraphernalia with intent to use. 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of a 
prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses use or misuse of Adrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens). AG 
¶ 24(a)(1). Drug abuse is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse,@ and 
Aillegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). The evidence raises these two disqualifying 
conditions, shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
6 
 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 The SOR alleges only a single use of methamphetamine, but the evidence 
reflects years of weekly and sometimes daily use, and it also reflects purchases of 
methamphetamine on more than one occasion. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered: A(a) to assess an applicant=s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant=s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether 
an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a 
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide 
evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3.@ ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I have considered the evidence 
of uncharged misconduct for these limited purposes.  
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on the recentness of drug involvement. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.   
 
 Applicant’s last drug involvement was more than four years ago. He has changed 
his lifestyle, changed his environment, and is receiving treatment. I conclude AG ¶ 26(a) 
is established. Any doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment 
arises from his lack of candor, discussed below, and not from his past drug involvement. 
 
Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b)(1)-(4). Applicant has established the first three of the four indicia of 
“demonstrated intent” encompassed in this mitigating condition. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition is not 
established because Applicant has not completed his drug treatment.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his e-QIP by failing to discose his 
pending felony charges for possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b); and failing to disclose his purchase and use of drugs (SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.d). It 
also alleges he deliberately failed to disclose the July 2004 incident during an interview 
with a security investigator in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.e); failed to disclose purchases of 
illegal drugs during an interview with a security investigator in July 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.f); 
and deliberately falsified his response to DOHA interrogatories in January 2008 when 
he represented that he had only used methamphetamine once and had never 
purchased it (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 A disqualifying condition may be raised by “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). A disqualifying 
condition also may be raised by “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(b). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant admitted at the hearing that he intentionally concealed his use of 
methamphetamine when he submitted his e-QIP. He was vague on the question 
whether he purchased the methamphetamine in his possession in July 2004, but he 
admitted earlier purchases. He admitted he intentionally concealed the July 2004 
incident during his security interview in May 2007. He admitted his responses to DOHA 
interrogatories were false.  
 
 Based on all the evidence, I conclude Applicant probably did not receive the 
criminal charges, summons, and arrest warrant, and was not aware that formal charges 
 
8 
 
 
against him were pending at the time he submitted his e-QIP. He was aware, however, 
of his drug involvement; and he intentionally concealed it on his e-QIP, during his May 
2007 security interview, and in response to DOHA interrogatories in January 2008. 
Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) are raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant made no attempt to correct his omissions and false 
statements, even though he had an opportunity during the May 2007 security interview. 
He did not make full disclosure until the hearing. I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Deliberate, knowing, and material falsifications of an e-QIP and during security 
interviews are felonies, not minor offenses. See 10 U.S.C. § 1001. Applicant’s 
falsifications were recent and did not occur under unique circumstances. His lack of 
candor casts doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness. I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. I have 
incorporated my discussion under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant is an intelligent adult. Since July 2004, he has taken significant steps to 
change his lifestyle, abstain from drugs, become a responsible adult, and care for his 
nine-year-old daughter. He disclosed his drug abuse in detail at his hearing and 
candidly admitted falsification of material information. This candor at the hearing is a 
positive indication of rehabilitation. His lack of candor on his e-QIP and during the 
security investigation preceding the hearing, however, raises doubts about his current 
reliability and trustworthiness. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guidelines H and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on drug 
involvement, but he has not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
