 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 06-25152 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines I (Psychological 
Conditions), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on July 9, 2004. On April 
18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines I, J, and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 28, 2008; answered it on the 
same day; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on April 30, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 12, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me on June 13, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 2, 2008, scheduling the hearing for July 23, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted without objection. The record closed 
upon adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2008. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of several 
definitions and diagnostic criteria set out in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV). Without objection from Applicant, I took 
administrative notice as requested. Excerpts from DSM-IV are attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations, but she admitted 
some of the facts alleged in the SOR during the hearing. Her admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old administrative aide for a defense contractor. She has 
worked for her current employer since July 1988 and has held a clearance since 
February 1990.  
 
 Applicant was married in July 1964 and divorced in September 1967. She 
remarried in July 1971 and was divorced in August 1982. She had two miscarriages and 
gave birth to a stillborn son in December 1964. She graduated from college with a 
bachelor of science degree in 1997.  
 
 Applicant’s 91-year-old father, a retired Air Force officer, submitted a letter 
identifying himself as a “proud parent” and describing Applicant’s life as “exemplary” 
(AX A). A co-worker who has worked for the same employer for 26 years and known 
Applicant for about eight months described her as caring, considerate, and hard-
working (AX B). 
 
 On January 28, 2005, Applicant entered a hospital hear her home and place of 
employment. In her answer to the SOR, she stated she voluntarily entered the hospital 
because she was feeling sad and sleepy and suffering from an upset stomach. The 
intake summary states she was referred to the hospital by her therapist (GX 5 at 19). At 
the hearing, she testified she was referred by her therapist (Tr. 123).  
 
 
3 
 
 
The clinician who made the intake assessment at the hospital observed that 
Applicant’s insight and judgment appeared to be impaired (GX 5 at 21). She was 
discharged from the hospital on February 28, 2005, with a diagnosis of major 
depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, with psychotic features; and anxiety disorder 
NOS (not otherwise specified) (GX 5 at 48). The discharge summary recites that 
Applicant found her work stressful, suffered from depression, appeared to have some 
paranoia, and had a pattern of having difficulty getting along with coworkers and 
effectively completing her job tasks for 8-10 years (GX 5 at 47-48). The prognosis was 
“somewhat guarded,” because her thought processes and related illness were 
longstanding and Applicant was “reluctant to admit to some of the internal difficulties 
and to address them behaviorally” (GX 5 at 49). 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a letter from the 
therapist who referred her to the hospital for treatment. The therapist stated that when 
she was treating Applicant, she observed no indications that Applicant would do 
anything to risk compromising sensitive information. On the contrary, she observed with 
Applicant reflected “rigid loyalty to protocol and a quite pride in her role as an adherent 
to security matters” (GX 2 at 3). 
 
 On July 5, 2006, a security investigator contacted Applicant by telephone to 
arrange an interview. At the time, the investigator had slightly less than four years of 
experience in security investigations (Tr. 80). The investigator had Applicant’s case file, 
and he knew she was a mature woman, but he did not know she lived alone (Tr. 46, 
77). The record does not reflect the investigator’s age, but he obviously is much 
younger than Applicant. The security investigator’s account of the conversation with 
Applicant is significantly different from Applicant’s account. 
 
 The investigator reported to his superiors that Applicant immediately became 
“belligerent, aggressive, and seemingly irrational” when he identified himself and told 
her the purpose of his call. The investigator stated Applicant did not want the interview 
conducted at her place of employment, which is the normal practice, and he eventually 
agreed to schedule the interview at her home. According to the investigator, Applicant 
accused the investigator, her employer, and the Department of Defense of persecuting 
her, and she could not understand why she was required to divulge personal medical 
information to the government and her employer. She accused the investigator of 
recording their conversation. According to the investigator, she told him she would slit 
his throat if he revealed her personal information to anyone. The investigator testified he 
asked her if she realized she had just threatened the life of a government 
representative, and she responded, “Yeah, I do and I’m glad I did it . . . I’ve been getting 
harassed by the government for a long time now.” After the investigator filed the report 
of his conversation with Applicant, he was told to cancel the interview, which he did. (Tr. 
56-57, GX 4 at 1-2.) 
 
 Applicant testified the investigator was “preying” on her, and he wanted to 
conduct the interview at her home, and that he promised to be discrete. She did not 
believe he was a government investigator (Tr. 126-27). She testified she becomes very 
 
4 
 
 
defensive and belligerent when she is “preyed on by a male.” She admitted telling the 
investigator she would slit his throat (Tr. 103-04). She testified she “freaked” and was so 
frightened she jumped a four-foot fence in her back yard and stayed overnight with a 
neighbor (Tr. 111). The next day she drove to another state to visit her cousin (Tr. 125). 
She believes her security clearance is at risk because she refused to allow the 
investigator to interview her at home (Tr. 105, 108, 110). 
 
The interview was rescheduled for July 20, 2006, at Applicant’s place of 
employment. The original investigator conducted the interview, with an additional 
investigator present. During this interview, Applicant described her personal history as 
well as her history of medical and psychological treatment. At the end of the interview, 
the additional investigator asked Applicant about her threat to slit the original 
investigator’s throat. Applicant responded that she “freaked out” during the telephone 
conversation, because she did not think the caller was a government investigator. She 
admitted making the statement, denied that the threat was sincere, and expressed 
regret for saying it. She told the original investigator that if he had come to her home as 
originally scheduled, the police would have been at her house when he arrived (Tr. 65, 
74; GX 4 at 5-6). 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied threatening the security investigator. 
When confronted with the discrepancy between her answer to the SOR and her 
testimony, she stated she did not type the answer to the SOR, did not notice the denial, 
and merely signed it (Tr. 130-31). After reviewing her written response to the SOR, she 
admitted she “must have” written it, but that it was a mistake (Tr. 133).  
 
The Department of Defense referred Applicant to a licensed clinical psychologist 
for evaluation on September 18, 2007. Applicant’s medical history recited in the 
evaluation report recites that Applicant completed a seven-day hospitalization for 
psychiatric treatment in 1979 and the four-week treatment described above in 2005. 
The psychologist observed that Applicant sometimes exhibits “idiosyncratic thought 
processes.” He noted that Applicant seemed to place great importance on generational 
and gender differences and was “mildly critical” of those of different gender and 
generational groups (GX 3 at 4). The psychologist made a provisional diagnosis of 
psychotic disorder; major depressive disorder recurrent, severe, with psychotic features; 
and bipolar I disorder, most recent episode unspecified, severe with psychotic features. 
He stated his diagnosis was provisional because he did not have historical, objective 
data, such as previous treatment records (GX 3 at 3). He concluded his evaluation with 
the following comments: 
 
Overall, [Applicant] appears to experience some mild and transient 
psychiatric symptoms on a day-to-day basis. These include a suspicious 
style of perceiving events and an idiosyncratic, rigid thinking style that 
probably does not interfere with daily functioning (though discussion with 
co-workers and supervisors would help to determine functional work 
impairments). Likewise, [Applicant] may be subject to mild transient mood 
swings as a result of daily stressors. In reviewing [Applicant’s] life events 
 
5 
 
 
and psychiatric treatment episodes, it appears that during times of stress 
[Applicant’s] mood swings may become more severe, and her thinking 
may shift from mildly suspicious to more significantly distorted and 
paranoid. It is unclear from the information provided and the psychological 
evaluation whether [Applicant] has ever experienced a gross psychotic 
break, though her reactions as described in the DoD testimonials suggest 
that she is capable of paranoid, distorted, and bizarre thought processes 
(GX 3 at 5). 
 
Applicant testified that this diagnosis was based on one hour of observation and that the 
psychologist also “hinted, very strongly, that he was bought and paid for by DOD” (Tr. 
121-22).  
 
 Applicant testified she began receiving therapy and psychiatric care after 
menopause because it caused chemical reactions in her body (Tr. 103). She testified 
her supervisors and colleagues know she has been taking antidepressants for many 
years (Tr. 107).  
 
 Applicant submitted an assessment by the psychologist who has been treating 
her for the past three years, disagreeing with the government psychologist’s 
assessment. The cover letter, signed by a registered nurse but approved by Applicant’s 
psychologist, states that the “highly un-specific, unusual cluster of diagnoses” submitted 
by the government psychologist is inconsistent with what Applicant’s psychologist has 
observed over a three-year period. Her psychologist describes her as “a woman who 
has been actively engaged in a recovery process from a major depressive disorder.” He 
further opined that she is “not homicidal, overtly psychotic, threatening, and does not 
show evidence of any symptoms of bipolar disorder” (AX E at 1).  
 
 The medical records submitted by Applicant include an evaluation by a clinical 
neuropsychologist in October 2005. This evaluation found no signs of dementia, but it 
found weakness in executive functioning. The psychologist explained: 
 
While deficits in executive functions can result from brain injury, especially 
in the frontal lobes, they are also seen in patients with organic mental 
disorders such as major depression, OCD, and psychosis, even if the 
patient’s acute symptoms have resolved. The nature of [Applicant’s] 
executive deficits appears to fit this pattern, and consequently they reflect 
more of a functional disorder rather than the sign of dementia or brain 
disease.  
 
The neuropsychologist concluded that Applicant would be more responsive to 
medication than therapy (AX E at 82).  
 
Applicant currently is taking citalopram, labeled as a “selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor used to treat depression” (AX C), and seroquel, labeled as an 
“atypical antipsychotic used to treat schizophrenia or bipolar disorder” (AX D). She 
 
6 
 
 
testified she takes seroquel “for sleeping” and has been taking it since her 
hospitalization in 2005 (Tr. 115-17).  
 
 The progress notes from Applicant’s psychologist reflect that on April 17, 2007, 
she felt “beaten up” by her employer, politicians, and her country, and she “hates” them 
all (AX E at 25). On February 12, 2008, she was agitated and “off the wall” at work after 
watching a movie the night before, and her friends at work told her to “back off” (AX E at 
20). On April 29, 2008, she expressed concern about the government psychologist’s 
evaluation of September 2007, and she accused the government psychologist of 
making suggestive gestures toward her that she rejected (AX E at 19). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I (Psychological Conditions) 
 
 The SOR alleges that, in February 2005, Applicant was diagnosed by a 
psychologist with (1) major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe with psychotic 
features; and (2) generalized anxiety disorder that resulted in impaired judgment and 
impaired insight (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that, in September 2007, she was 
diagnosed by a licensed clinical psychologist with (1) psychotic disorder, not otherwise 
specified; (2) major depressive disorder recurrent, severe, with psychotic features; and 
(3) bipolar I disorder, most recent episode unspecified, severe with psychotic features.  
 The security concern under Guideline I is set out in AG ¶ 27 as follows: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
A potentially disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by 
“behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that 
is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally 
unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior.” AG ¶ 
 
8 
 
 
28(a). A potentially disqualifying condition also may be raised by “an opinion by a duly 
qualified mental health professional that the individual has a condition not covered 
under any other guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.” (AG 
¶ 28(b). The diagnoses from February 2005 and September 2007 raise both 
disqualifying conditions.  
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 28(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated if “the identified condition 
is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan.” AG ¶ 29(a). Applicant appears to have 
scrupulously complied with her treatment plans. The issue is with the first prong, 
whether her condition is “readily controllable with treatment.” The discharge summary 
from her hospitalization in 2005 was guarded, and her subsequent behavior raises 
doubts about whether her psychological condition is “readily controllable.”  
The episode with the security investigator in July 2006 occurred because 
Applicant felt threatened by a “male predator.” Based on all the evidence and my 
observations of her demeanor and the security investigator’s demeanor, I believe she 
actually felt threatened, was terrified, and was acting defensively when she threatened 
to slit his throat. What the investigator may have actually said appears to have been 
filtered through her concern with generational and gender differences and her fear of 
telephone calls from unidentified males. I do not believe the investigator made 
suggestive comments, but I do believe Applicant’s fear was real, and she reacted 
accordingly. 
Applicant’s agitated and “off the wall” behavior after watching a movie also raises 
doubts whether her condition is fully controllable. Her problems are further indicated by 
her suspicion that the government psychologist conducting the evaluation in September 
2007 made suggestive gestures toward her. Her own psychologist describes her as 
“engaged in a recovery process,” but he does not opine that she is recovered. Based on 
all the evidence, I conclude Applicant has not carried her burden of establishing the first 
prong of AG ¶ 29(a). 
Security concerns also can be mitigated if “the individual has voluntarily entered 
a counseling or treatment program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the 
individual is currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional.” AG ¶ 29(b). Applicant is voluntarily receiving 
treatment. Her condition appears to be “amenable to treatment,” but not fully 
controllable. Her psychologist believes she is engaged in the recovery process, but he 
did not offer a prognosis. I conclude Applicant has not carried her burden of establishing 
AG ¶ 29(b). 
 
9 
 
 
 Finally, security concerns can be mitigated by a “recent opinion by a duly 
qualified mental health professional employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the 
U.S. Government that an individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, 
and has a low probability of recurrence or exacerbation.” AG ¶ 29(c). The evaluation in 
September 2007, although it is a provisional diagnosis, falls short of concluding her 
condition is under control or in remission, and it indicates the possibility of more severe 
episodes during times of stress. I conclude AG ¶ 29(c) is not established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant threatened to slit the throat of a security investigator 
if he disclosed any information about her (SOR ¶ 2.a).  
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 Department Counsel did not present any evidence or request that I take 
administrative notice of any federal, state, or local statute criminalizing her conduct. I 
am satisfied, however, that Applicant did not entertain the mens rea required to 
criminalize her conduct. She did not believe the investigator was an agent of the 
government, she perceived a threat, and she reacted defensively. I conclude no 
disqualifying conditions are raised under this guideline. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The same conduct alleged under Guideline J is also alleged under this guideline. 
The concern under this guideline is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.” AG ¶ 15. 
A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information.” AG ¶ 16(c). A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “credible 
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not 
be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
 
10 
 
 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.” AG ¶ 16(d). Applicant’s threat to kill the security 
investigator reflects impaired judgment sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d), shifting 
the burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s threat was serious and recent, and it reflects impaired judgment. I conclude 
this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns also can be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 
17(d). Applicant has generally acknowledged her psychological problems, obtained 
treatment, and complied with her treatment program. While her psychologist believes 
she is “engaged in a recovery process,” she is not yet recovered, as evidenced by her 
recent perception that the government psychologist made suggestive gestures toward 
her. I conclude this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns can be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). Applicant has taken positive steps to deal with her psychological problems, and 
she has made significant progress, even though her vulnerability is not yet eliminated. I 
conclude this mitigating condition is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
11 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for a defense contractor and held a clearance for many 
years. She appears dedicated and proud of her work. She is unlikely to intentionally 
violate any security rules. However, there is substantial evidence that she suffers from 
conditions beyond her control that affect her perception of events and impair her 
judgment and insight.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines I, J, 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct, but she has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on psychological conditions and personal 
conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I (Psychological Conditions): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
                                                     
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
