                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 06-20455
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Thomas M. Abbott, Attorney At Law
September 29, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
           Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations (e-QIP), on
August 6, 2007.  On March 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines B and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 21, 2008.  She answered
the SOR in writing on April 24, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on June 4, 2008.  A notice
of hearing was issued on June 17, 2008, and the matter was scheduled for hearing on
July 10, 2008.  The Government presented two exhibits, referred to as Government
Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection.  The Applicant presented
fourteen exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through N, which were received
without objection. The Applicant also testified on her own behalf.  DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 22, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file,
2
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in Iran.  Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p.
12).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but
were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the
Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 35 years old and married.  She is employed by a defense
contractor as an Electrical Engineer, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with her employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Tehran, Iran to Iranian parents.  Her parents divorced
when she was two years old, and her mother moved to the United States and remarried.
The Applicant was raised by her paternal grandparents until the age of nineteen, when
she came to the United States.  In May 1993, the Applicant, was sponsored by her
mother and came to the United States to pursue the American dream.  In 2000, she
became a naturalized United States citizen.  
In 1999, the Applicant married an Iranian citizen who resides with her in the
United States.  He currently has a green card.  Her husband plans to apply for United
States citizenship, but because of a criminal record, he is ineligible until he completes
his probation in 2009.  
The Applicant’s mother resides in the United States and is a naturalized United
States citizen.  Her mother’s husband has passed away.  Her mother had one daughter
from the marriage.  The Applicant’s half-sister resides in the United States with the
Applicant’s mother.  She has a young daughter, who is the Applicant’s niece.
      
The Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Iran.  The Applicant indicates
that she was never close to her father because she was raised by his parents. She last
spoke to him in 2005.  Her father is 64 years old, and retired from working for a water
and power company.  She does not know if the company he worked for is government
affiliated. 
3
The Applicant explained that her father sent her paperwork to help him and his
Iranian wife get a green card to permit them to come to the United States.  The
Applicant did not apply for him because she does not want him to stay with her.  Her
father knows that she is an electrical engineer and knows the name of the company she
works for.  The Applicant’s father and his wife have two children.  
The Applicant has a half-brother and half-sister in Iran.  The Applicant’s half-
brother is married, and he and his wife work for the same pharmaceutical company.
The Applicant has what she describes as a “polite relationship” with her half-brother and
half-sister.  She last spoke to her half-brother in August 2007.  They both know that she
works for a defense contractor as an Electrical Engineer.  The Applicant’s half-sister
resides with their father and is attending school.  The Applicant and her half-sister do
not get along.  
The Applicant’s paternal grandmother, who raised the Applicant, and with whom
the Applicant has the closest relationship, is a citizen and resident of Iran.  Her
grandmother is now 87 years old and not in good health.  The Applicant’s grandfather
passed away in 1992.      
The Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen of Iran and a resident of both the United
States and Iran.  He has a green card that he obtained in 2002.  He splits his time
between Iran and the United States.  He is a retired journalist for a local newspaper in
Iran.  He has two sons that reside in the United States.  
The Applicant’s husband has one sister and two brothers who are citizens and
residents of Iran.  One of her brother-in-laws knows that the Applicant is an electrical
engineer and where she works.  The other brother-in-law is mentally handicapped and
needs supervision.  Her sister-in-law and her husband in Iran are book publishers.
They have two children.  Her sister-in-law also knows the name of the company the
Applicant works for.  
Since 1993, the Applicant has traveled back to Iran on three occasions to visit
her family there.  She traveled to Iran in 1997, in 2002 for her wedding ceremony and to
share her success with her grandmother, and in 2005, to attend her half-brother’s
wedding.  The only family that the Applicant felt she had in the United States was her
mother.  In August 2007, because her grandmother was very ill, the Applicant made
arrangements with her other relatives to bring her grandmother to Turkey so that the
Applicant could visit her.  The Applicant met her grandmother and other family members
from Iran in Turkey for that visit.  
     
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
her personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SF-86) which was
electronically submitted on May 7, 2003.  Question 15 asked her, “In the last seven
years, have you had an active passport that was issued by a foreign government”, to
which she answered, “No”.  This was a false response.  The Applicant failed to list the
4
fact that she had an Iranian passport which had been extended on May 13, 2002 to
June 16, 2007.  
  
Question 16 of the same security clearance application, asked the Applicant
“Have you traveled outside the United States on other than official U.S. Government
orders in the last seven years”, to which the Applicant answered, “No”.  This was a false
response.  The Applicant failed to list the fact that she had traveled to Iran in 1997, and
in 2002, for her wedding.
For three years, from 2003 through 2006, the Applicant did not disclose to the
Government or to anyone else that she had an Iranian passport and that she had
traveled to Iran in 1997 and 2002.  The Applicant stated that she knowingly and
conscientiously made the decision not to disclose this information, as she did not want
anyone to know about her ties to Iran.  (Tr. pp. 84-85).  She had heard from her friends
that if she disclosed her travel to Iran it would look bad and it might jeopardize her
chances of obtaining a security clearance.  (Tr. p. 87).  Her whole fear was that if she
disclosed her Iranian passport and her trips to Iran her security clearance might be
denied.  (Tr. p. 89).  She also stated that she did not know how important it was to be
honest.  (Tr. pp. 100 -101).    
After waiting three years for the security clearance application process and after
being removed from her position in the lab, the Applicant reported that she possessed
an Iranian passport and that she had traveled to Iran in 1997 and 2002.  (Tr. pp. 67-68
and 90-91).  The Applicant has since shredded her Iranian passport.  (Tr. p. 69 and
Applicant’s Exhibit N).  She has not renounced her Iranian citizenship, but is willing to
do so.
Letters of recommendation from professional associates of the Applicant,
including her supervisor, attest to her outstanding work performance, diligence,
reliability, trustworthiness and her expertise as an Engineer.  (See Applicant’s Exhibits
A, B, C, D, F, G, and H). 
Applicant’s Performance Evaluations for 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007 reflect that
she either meets or exceeds expectations in every category.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit I).
Applicant has received various awards and commendations for her contributions to the
company.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit J).
Since members of Applicant’s family are citizens and residents of Iran, it is
relevant to examine the status and the nature of the country.  Currently, Iran is
considered one of the most dangerous adversaries to the interests of the United States.
The U.S. has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since April 7, 1980, following the
November 1979 Iranian student occupation of the American Embassy in Tehran and the
hostage taking of 52 Americans, which was supported by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini,
Iran’s leader at the time.
The United States Government’s concerns with Iran’s policies include, but are
not limited to the following: (1) its clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons of
mass destruction, (2) its sponsorship of international terrorism, (3) its intervention into
the internal affairs of Iraq, (4) its aggressive efforts to undermine the Middle East peace
5
process, and (5) its human rights violation against its own people.  As a result of these
concerns, the U.S. prohibits most trade with Iran.
Policies
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided
into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a)  Deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
6
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
7
Conclusion
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in foreign influence and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant is subject to foreign influence (Guideline B) and has engaged in dishonest
conduct (Guideline E).  This evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with her security
clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines B and E of the SOR.
Under Foreign Influence, Guideline B, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However
Mitigating Condition 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. also applies.  
The Applicant has immediate and extended relatives in Iran.  Her grandmother, is
the person with whom she has the closest bond of affection.  Her grandmother is a
citizen and resident of Iran, and has been like a  mother to the Applicant.  The
Applicant’s close and continuing contact with her grandmother as well as her contact
with other relatives in Iran pose a security risk.  Although she does not maintain regular
consistent contact with any of them, most of her relatives in Iran know what she does for
a living, and they know who she woks for. The Applicant has deep emotional ties with
her family in Iran as evidence by her decision and great effort to hold her wedding
8
ceremony in Iran with relatives instead of with her friends in the United States.  Under
the heightened scrutiny analysis, the Applicant’s family in Iran pose a significant security
risk.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under this guideline.   
Under Personal Conduct, Guideline E, Disqualifying Condition 16.(a)  Deliberate
omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  None of the mitigation conditions are applicable.    
The evidence shows that the Applicant intentionally falsified her security
clearance application in 2003, by failing to disclose that she possessed an Iranian
passport and that she traveled to Iran in 1997 and in 2002.  She failed to disclose this
information  because she did not want to jeopardize her chances of obtaining a security
clearance.  This intentional deception goes directly to the Applicant’s credibility.  I
cannot find that she is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to classified information.
The Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty of clearance holders.  It is
a negative factor for security clearance purposes when an Applicant has deliberately
provided false information about material aspects of her personal background.
Accordingly, Guideline E is found against the Applicant.   
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including her favorable
recommendations, performance evaluations and awards, however, it does not come
close to mitigating the negative effects of her foreign influence and her dishonesty and
the effects that it can have on her ability to safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  
     Formal Findings
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
9
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
 
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
