                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-00766 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
                              
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant completed his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 17, 
2006. On January 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines 
F, E and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receiving the SOR, answered the SOR in writing on 
April 11, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA 
received the request on April 14, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on May 20, 2008, and I received the case assignment on May 27, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on June 9, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 1, 
2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE.) 1 through 18, which were received without 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, but did not submit any Exhibits. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 15, 2008. I held the record open until 
July 31, 2008 for Applicant to submit additional matters.  He did not. The record closed 
on July 31, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated he received the hearing notice more than 15 
days prior to the hearing as required under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive. (Tr. at 8.)  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by adding ¶ 1.v through 1.aa, alleging 
additional debts owed by Applicant and mailed the amendment to Applicant in April 
2008. Applicant submitted his response to the amendment on May 13, 2008 without 
objection to the additional allegations. The amendment to the SOR and Applicant’s 
answer are part of the record in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 11, 2008, Applicant admitted the 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. - 1.g, 1.l. - 1.aa, and 2.a. He denied the allegations ¶¶ 1.h. – 1.k. 
He did not admit or deny the allegation in ¶ 3.a., which is deemed denied. 
 
 Applicant, who is 44 years old, works as site manager for a Department of 
Defense contractor. He began his employment in March 2006. He completed his 
security clearance application on April 27, 2006.1 
 
 Applicant married 18 years ago. He has four children, two sons and two 
daughters. He attended college for three years, but did not graduate. From 1988 until 
2006, he worked for a sheriff’s department. He sustained a work-related injury to his 
knee in March 2003. He completed his medical treatment for this injury in 2005. In June 
2006, he officially retired from his job. He decided on a one-time lump-sum payment of 
$81,000 instead of a monthly benefit. After he paid his federal taxes on this money, he 
used it to pay $8,000 in outstanding medical bills not covered by workers compensation 
and $40,000 in bills.2 
 
 In 1995, Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 petition for bankruptcy because 
serious debt problems arose after Applicant had paid $20,000 in attorney fees to secure 
custody of his daughter from a relationship. Two years later, on September 11, 1997, 
1GE 1 (Security Clearance application) at 1-2; Tr. 17. 
 
2GE 1, supra note 1, at 3-5; Tr. 17-21. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
the court dismissed this case. Five days later, Applicant and his wife filed a second 
Chapter 13 petition for bankruptcy. On November 11, 1999, the bankruptcy court 
discharged their debts.3 
 
 Just over one year later, on December 29, 2000, Applicant and his wife again 
filed a Chapter 13 petition for bankruptcy, which the court dismissed on July 6, 2001. 
Immediately thereafter, on July 10, 2001, Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 7 
petition for bankruptcy. The court discharged all his debts on November 29, 2001.4 
 
 Approximately two and one-half years later, Applicant and his wife filed their 
fourth Chapter 13 petition for bankruptcy, which the court administratively dismissed on 
July 7, 2004. Three days later, Applicant and his wife filed their fifth Chapter 13 petition 
for bankruptcy, which the court dismissed on January 24, 2005 when they did not 
comply with the payment terms of their Chapter 13 plan. Applicant states that the 
repayment plan had been based on two incomes and that because his income had 
declined significantly because of his injury, he could not meet the terms of his 
repayment plan. Three days later Applicant and his wife filed their most recent Chapter 
13 petition for bankruptcy. They developed a repayment plan with their creditors, which 
they paid for a period of time. They eventually stopped making regular monthly 
payments and the court dismissed their case for noncompliance with the plan terms on 
July 19, 2006.5 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems continue to exist. For a number of years, Applicant 
claimed a high number of exemptions on his W-2, which he no longer does. When he 
completed his tax returns, he owed the state or federal government money, which he 
did not have.  Some years he did not timely file his tax returns . In May 2002, the State 
filed two tax liens against him for $1,070 and $2,395 respectively. In October 2003, the 
State filed two tax liens against him for $2,074 and $777 respectively. The state filed 
additional tax liens against Applicant, totaling $13,862 in August 2006 and twice in 
October 2006. Applicant testified that he developed a repayment plan with the State. 
Under the terms of this plan, he pays the State $100 a month and the State takes any 
refund he receives for a tax year and applies the amount to his unpaid taxes. He has 
not provided any documentation which supports his testimony, thus, I find that he has 
not established his compliance with this payment plan or that he has satisfied any of his 
state tax debts.6 
3GE 12 (Bankruptcy court case summary for 1997 filing); GE 13 (Bankruptcy court case for 1995 
filing); Tr. 22-26. 
 
4GE 10 (Bankruptcy court case summary for 2001 filing); GE 11 (Bankruptcy court case summary 
for 2000 filing); Tr. 27. 
 
5GE 7 (Bankruptcy court case summary for 2005 filing); GE  8 (Bankruptcy court case summary 
for 2004 filing); GE 9 (Bankruptcy court case summary for 2004 filing); Tr. 28-30, 86-87. 
 
6GE 2 (Credit Report, dated April 29, 2008; GE  3 (Credit report, dated December 20, 2007); GE 
14 (Copy of tax lien filing October 2003); GE 15 (Copy of tax lien filing August 2006); GE 17 (Copy of tax 
lien filing October 2006); GE 17 (Copy of tax lien filing October 2006); Tr. 31-32, 76-78, 81-82. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 On November 20, 2006, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a tax lien 
against Applicant in the amount of $31,213. He testified that he reached an agreement 
with the IRS to repay his tax debt in 2006. He agreed to pay the IRS $200 a month and 
that the IRS would retain any refunds he would receive in a tax year. He did not provide 
any documentation on this agreement or information which shows his compliance with 
the terms of the agreement. I find that he has not established his compliance with his 
federal tax payment plan.7 
 
 Applicant admitted all the remaining debts listed in the SOR and amended SOR 
in his responses.  At the hearing, he acknowledged that these debts are not paid, 
except for the allegation in ¶ 1.z., which he stated was paid. He provided no supporting 
documentation to show that this debt is paid. Thus, I find that he has not established 
that he paid this debt. He denied knowing the medical provider in allegation ¶¶ 1.p and 
1.r. The credit reports indicated that he challenged the debt in ¶1.r. He also denied 
knowing the creditors who obtained a judgment against him in the allegations contained 
in ¶¶ 1.e, 1. f and 1.g, despite admitting that he owed these debts. He also 
acknowledged that he had not attempted to determine the creditor through court 
records.8 
 
 Applicant’s wife is currently on short-term disability as she suffers from severe 
depression. She has applied for long-term disability, but has not yet been approved. Her 
medical insurance expired in April 2008. Applicant has medical insurance for himself as 
his employer pays the premiums. His wife and children do not have insurance because 
he cannot afford to pay the premiums. His wife’s medicines cost $200 a month and her 
medical treatment totals $80 a month.9 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,200 and his wife’s short-term disability 
income is $1,900 a month for a total monthly income of $4,100. His monthly expenses, 
including her medical bills and his tax payments, total $3,617. He and his wife have 
developed a budget and try to live within their budget. Applicant admits that his financial 
problems have been the result of money mismanagement and irresponsibility.10 
 
 The government mailed interrogatories to Applicant in May 2007. Question two 
States: “Please provide a Bankruptcy Trustee Report or other documentation from the 
Bankruptcy Trustee reflecting your Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments are current.” In his 
response to the interrogatory, applicant stated that his bankruptcy had been discharged 
and that currently all money owed due to bankruptcy is being paid, including all state 
and federal taxes owed. The government contends that his answer was not truthful 
 
 
7GE 16 (Copy of IRS tax lien filing November 2006); Tr. 33-34, 76-78, 80, 81, 83. 
 
8Response to SOR and amendment to SOR; Tr. 37-42, 49-62. 
 
9Tr. 43-44, 63-67. 
 
10Tr. 26, 43-47, 65-68. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
because his most recent bankruptcy had been dismissed because he failed to comply 
with monthly payments. Applicant agreed, but denies any intent to deceive the 
government because he did not know the difference between dismissed, discharged 
and terminated. He thought he gave the correct answer. He states he now knows the 
difference. The allegation does not allege intentional falsification, only that he had not 
been truthful in his answer.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
11GE  6 (Interrogatories and answers, dated May 21, 2007); Tr. 48, 90-91. 
 
 
6 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG & 
19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly 
under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise security 
concerns. Despite having his debts discharged in 1999 and 2001, he continues to have 
significant unpaid debts. 
 
I have considered all the mitigating conditions and concluded that none apply in 
this case. Applicant has disputed one medical debt for $524 and this allegation is found 
in his favor. Although he testified that he has a repayment plan for his federal and state 
taxes, he has not provided documentation to show that he has made the required 
payments and is in compliance with the plan. Given his long history of unpaid debts, I 
can not find that he has mitigated the government’s concerns about his tax liens without 
adequate documentation of his payments. He acknowledges his other debts are unpaid. 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
 The government established that Applicant incorrectly provided information 
regarding his 2007 bankruptcy when answering the interrogatories propounded to him. 
This information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a 
security clearance and to his honesty. For this guideline to apply, Applicant’s incorrect 
answer must be deliberate. In his response, he agreed that the information provided 
was incorrect. He denies, however, that he deliberately falsified his answer to these 
questions. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the 
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the 
time the omission occurred.1 For DC ¶ 16 (a) to apply, the government must establish 
that Applicant’s omission, concealment or falsification in his answer was deliberate. 
 
Applicant had no intent to deceive. His carelessness about learning the 
difference among the various legal terms employed in bankruptcy cases is not enough 
to show intentional falsification. His lack of understanding about these differences does 
not show he lied; only that he misused the terminology. Government has not 
established its case of intentional falsification. Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant. 
 
 
 
1See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case 
No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline  J 
 
 Since I found Guideline E in Applicant’s favor, I find in favor of Applicant on this 
Guideline. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. For many years, Applicant and his 
wife have made very poor decisions about money. As a result, they have filed numerous 
bankruptcy petitions. Twice their debts have been discharged. They, however, did not 
change spending habits. They continued to get into serious debt by over spending their 
income and making poor financial choices. With his lump sum payment from his work 
related disability, Applicant paid debts, but could not or did not resolve all his debts. In 
fact, he accumulated more unpaid debt. He has done little to resolve his debt issues 
and given his past history, it is unlikely he will do so in the future. He has not 
demonstrated that he has control over his spending habits and his finances. Applicant 
has not mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r-1.aa:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
MARY E. HENRY 
Administrative Judge 
