 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06938 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP), on November 30, 2006. On March 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 5, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to be proceed on June 26, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2008. On July 31, 2008, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2008. The case was heard 
on that date. The Government offered six exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6. The Applicant offered one exhibit which was admitted as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant also testified. The record was held open until September 22, 
 
2 
 
 
2008 to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a 
nine-page document which was admitted without objection. The transcript was received 
on September 11, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.n, but denies the allegations in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with his company for one year 
and 8 months. He has a bachelor’s degree. He served on active duty, as a helicopter 
pilot, in the United States Army for 27 years. He retired at the rank of Chief Warrant 
Officer 5 on September 31, 2005. He is married and has two daughters, ages 10 and 
15. (Tr at 5-6, 23-25,51; Gov 1)  
 
On November 30, 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing, (e-QIP), in conjunction with his employment with a 
department of defense contractor. He answered “No” in response to “Section 28(a) In 
the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He also 
answered “No” in response to “Section 28(b) Are you currently 90 days delinquent on 
any debt(s)?”(Gov 1.) 
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:  a $28 medical account placed for collection in May 2001 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Gov 4 at 11); an $173 phone account placed for collection in May 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Gov 4 at 10); a $320 phone account placed for collection in June 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 
4 at 11); a $533 medical account placed for collection in October 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 
5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $345 phone account placed for collection in November 2002 (SOR 
¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 8,10; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $331 phone account placed for 
collection in November 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 4 at 8,10; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $300 
water bill placed for collection in April 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 4 at 11; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 
at 1); a $112 medical account placed for collection in April 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 4 at 
10-11; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 1); a $211 electric bill placed for collection in September 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 4 at 11); a $1,000 credit card account that was charged off in 
June 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 1); a $783 credit card account that was 
charged off in June 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 4 at 5); a $1,006 account placed for 
collection in October 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 6 at 2); a $17,129 balance owed for an 
automobile that was repossessed in April 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 
6 at 2); and a $929 account placed for collection in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 4 at 6).     
 
In response to interrogatories, dated August 10, 2007, Applicant indicated that he 
was unaware of any of the delinquent accounts stated that he would research to see 
whether they are his accounts. (Gov 2.) In response to interrogatories, dated January 
 
3 
 
 
25, 2008, Applicant stated that he researched the accounts, and they are his debts. He 
was coordinating repayment arrangements with his creditors. (Gov 3.) 
 
Applicant’s wife handled the family finances. She did not tell him about several 
accounts that became delinquent. They divorced in September 2005. Applicant admits 
to being financially irresponsible during the period when he was on his own. He and his 
wife reconciled in January 2007. Applicant did not obtain a copy of his credit report 
when he completed his e-QIP questionnaire. He was not aware that he had delinquent 
debts over 90-180 days old until he was sent the financial interrogatories. He believed 
that he was answering is e-QIP questionnaire correctly when he stated that he had no 
debts over 90 days delinquent. (Tr at 49-55; Gov 2 at 9, 11.)   
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that he has paid or resolved most of the delinquent 
accounts in the SOR. He was unable to locate the creditor for the $28 medical account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The government’s evidence, a credit report, listed a $29 debt for a 
medical account. The name of the creditor was not provided. (Tr at 22.) I find for 
Applicant regarding this debt because the pleading is too vague.  
 
Applicant states that he contacted the creditor for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.j, and 1.k. They have no records of an account and intend to remove the items from 
his credit report. (Tr at 40-41.)  
 
Applicant agreed to pay $500 per month towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m.  
Applicant’s car was repossessed in the Spring 2007. This is his largest debt. He set up 
an allotment through his bank account. (Tr at 44, 46, AE A, #4; AE B at 5,7,8.)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n is the same as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. (Tr 
at 42-43, 45.) I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶1.n.  
 
Sufficient proof has been provided to conclude the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.l have been resolved. (AE A; AE B.) Applicant claims that 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c has been paid. (Tr at 31; AE A; AE B.) No documentation 
was provided supporting payment. Applicant used money from his savings account and 
$8,000 received in special pay from his employer to pay the debts. (Tr at 63.) 
 
Applicant’s current financial position is stable. His net monthly take home pay is 
approximately $6,000. He receives a monthly military retirement check of approximately 
$4,000.  His total net monthly income is $10,000. He pays $2,000 a month in rent. Other 
monthly expenses include: $400 groceries; $560 gas; $400 clothing; $400 utilities; $120 
car insurance; $558 auto loan; $350 truck loan, and $320 medical. Total monthly 
expenses are approximately $5,108.  Applicant has approximately $4,892 left over each 
month after expenses to pay towards other bills. He is current on federal and state 
taxes. (Tr at 59-63.) 
 
During his military career, Applicant has deployed to Bosnia, Somalia, 
Afghanistan, and Iraq. (Tr at 25.) His awards and decorations included the Legion of 
 
4 
 
 
Merit, the Bronze Star, Meritorious Service Medal (3rd Award), Air Medal W/V Device, 
Army Commendation Medal (4th Award), Army Achievement Medal (4th Award); 
Valorous Unit Medal (2nd Award), Army Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service 
Medal (2nd Award), Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal (2nd Award), Southwest Asia 
Service Medal with Bronze Service Star (3rd Award), Army Service Ribbon, Overseas 
Service Ribbon (3rd Award), UN Medal, Kuwait Liberation Medal (Saudi Arabia) Kuwait 
Liberation Medal (Kuwait), NATO Medal, USA Master Aviator Badge, and the Global 
War on Terrorism Service Medal. (Tr at 24-25; AE B at 2-4.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. From 2001 to 2007, Applicant incurred 
12 delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $22,243. The largest debt in 
the amount of $17,129 relates to an automobile repossession in the spring 2007. 
Applicant’s income is sufficient to meet his expenses. The financial issues appear to be 
the result of neglect rather than an inability to pay debts. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant’s 
history of financial irresponsibility appears to have resulted from a break down in 
communication regarding certain bills with Applicant’s wife who handled the family 
finances.  His divorce in September 2005 more than likely added further complications. 
Applicant resolved most of the accounts and entered into a payment plan pertaining to 
his largest debt. Although most of the payments are relatively recent, Applicant has 
sufficient income to meet his expenses.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
6 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant’s September 
2005 divorce played a part in his financial situation. He was unaware of the extent of his 
delinquent debts until he received interrogatories in August 10, 2007. After confirming 
the debts were valid, he took steps to resolve the accounts. He acted responsibly under 
the circumstances 
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply with respect to financial counseling. However, there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved. Applicant paid most of the debts. He 
entered into a repayment agreement for his largest debt. His income is sufficient to 
meet his expenses. This experience has taught Applicant to be more proactive in 
insuring that his financial responsibilities are met.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant resolved the majority of his 
delinquent accounts, and entered into a repayment agreement with the creditor of the 
debt that has the highest balance.  
 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent debts in response to sections 28(a) and 28(b) on his e-QIP questionnaire, 
dated November 30, 2006. The following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC 
DC) potentially applies to Applicant’s case: PC DC ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 I find that it does not apply. Applicant was not aware of the delinquent debts until 
he was served interrogatories in conjunction with his background investigation on 
August 10, 2007. He states that his wife handled the family finances. Though he admits 
 
7 
 
 
that he neglected his finances when they were separated, he was not aware that he had 
delinquent accounts more than 90/180 days delinquent when he completed his security 
clearance questionnaire. I conclude his omission was not intentional. 
 
 I find for Applicant under the Personal Conduct concern. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 27 years of 
honorable service in the United States Army. Applicant’s debts became delinquent as a 
result of neglect as opposed to a refusal or inability to pay. Applicant has taken steps to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He earns sufficient income to meet his financial 
obligations and does not appear to live above his means. Applicant mitigated the 
concerns raised under financial considerations based on his efforts to resolve his 
accounts. Personal Conduct is found for Applicant because he did not intentionally omit 
his delinquent accounts on his e-QIP application.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
