KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant bears the burden on appeal that there is insufficient indicia of reliability to
allow the admission into evidence of two credit reports.  Applicant fails to meet this burden and
fails to establish that there is insufficient evidence to support the Judge’s decision.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-08925.al
DATE: 09/15/2008
DATE: September 15, 2008
In Re:
-------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-08925
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Government Exhibits 6 and 7.1
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 28, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be decided on the written record, and
submitted documents for the Judge to consider.  He also filed a motion to suppress, requesting that
two documents submitted by Department Counsel (credit reports) be excluded from the record.  The
Judge denied Applicant’s motion.  On April 25, 2008, after considering the written record,
Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied  Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (a) whether the Judge erred by denying
Applicant’s motion to suppress and by considering the two credit reports submitted by Department
Counsel; (b)  whether Department Counsel acted improperly by not “verifying” the accuracy of the
information contained in the credit reports and by omitting information favorable to Applicant, in
diminution of her responsibility to present the “whole-person concept” to the Judge; and (c) whether
the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The gravamen of Applicant’s assertion on appeal is that two credit reports submitted by
Department Counsel  contained numerous substantive errors, were thus unreliable, and therefore1
should have been excluded from consideration by the Judge.  In the course of proffering his appeal
arguments, Applicant made various representations concerning the policies and practices of credit
reporting agencies and proper reporting methods.  He also includes with his appeal brief a lengthy
attachment which he claims is not being submitted as evidence, but as “supporting information for
verification of this statement.”  Applicant’s assertions about the credit reporting companies and his
attachment constitute new evidence offered on appeal, which the Board cannot consider.  Directive
¶ E3.1.29.   
            Applicant contends that the two credit reports are replete with errors.  He claims these errors
involve matters such as personal data as well as the status of various debts that are listed in the
reports.  Applicant argues that because of these errors, the credit reports do not meet the
requirements for the business record exception under the Federal Rules of Evidence, even when
those rules are used as a general guide.  Thus, the reports should not have been admitted as evidence
in the case.
The Judge has the authority to rule on evidentiary matters.  Directive ¶ E3.1.10.  Those
rulings are subject to review to determine whether they are consistent with pertinent provisions of
Executive Order 10865 and the Directive ¶ E3.1.32.2, and whether they are arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  The Board notes that any review of a Judge’s evidentiary
ruling must take place in the context of the Directive’s pronouncement that the Federal Rules of
Evidence shall serve as a guide and that technical rules of evidence may be relaxed to permit the
development of a full and complete record. Directive ¶ E3.1.19.        
In terms of the issue of basic admissibility, Applicant bears the burden on appeal of
establishing that the indicia of reliability in the method of the promulgation of the record is lacking
to the point that it cannot be accepted under the rules governing the business records exception to
the hearsay rule.  Neither below nor on appeal does Applicant establish that the documents were
improperly or irregularly produced, or produced in circumstances that would render their reliability
suspect.  Rather, Applicant simply makes uncorroborated and conclusory assertions that the
documents contain inaccuracies.  Such claims, even if proved, would go to the weight the
information in the documents should receive, rather than to the documents’ admissibility.  A review
of the Judge’s decision reveals that the Judge engaged in a thoughtful and thorough analysis of the
admissibility issue and resolved it in a manner that was within her discretion.  The Board finds no
error in the Judge’s admission of the documents into evidence.    
    
Applicant’s assertions that Department Counsel acted improperly and unprofessionally by
neglecting to verify the accuracy of the contents of the credit reports are without merit.  First,
Applicant’s arguments are based on the premise that the contents of the reports were largely
erroneous, a proposition that Applicant fails to establish.  Moreover, credit reports are ordinary
business records which are routinely accepted in DOHA proceedings.  Department Counsel is
entitled to rely on the evidence contained therein,  and is under no obligation to verify the accuracy
of that evidence before presenting it.  Applicant is free, of course, to provide any evidence in his
possession that speaks to the issue of the accuracy of the information contained in the reports.  
Applicant also asserts that Department Counsel acted improperly by omitting from
unspecified documents evidence favorable to Applicant.  This, Applicant argues, had the effect of
“skewing” the whole-person concept that “[c]ounsel is responsible in presenting to the court.”  Aside
from the fact that Applicant offers no proof for his claim and has not stated the claim with sufficient
specificity for the Board to effectively evaluate it, there is no affirmative duty on the part of
Department Counsel to unilaterally submit evidence establishing the “whole-person.”  Applicant has
the affirmative duty to present evidence on his behalf.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15 (“The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”).  Absent a showing that Department
Counsel did not provide adequate discovery or otherwise improperly withheld favorable evidence
from Applicant to his detriment, Applicant’s claim is without merit.
Implicit in Applicant’s appeal is the assertion that the Judge’s decision is not supported by
the record evidence and is, therefore, arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law.  The Board has
examined the Judge’s decision in light of the record evidence, and concludes that her findings of fact
and conclusions are supported by substantial record evidence.  See Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1
(Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record”).  The Judge has drawn
a rational connection between the facts found and her ultimate adverse security clearance decision.
See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n
of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance”
is sustainable on this record.  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).    
    
Conclusion
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett     
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
