                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-09048
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 29, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) dated January
19, 2006.  On March 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the
Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 24, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing on April 21, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on June 19, 2008.  It
was transferred to the undersigned Administrative Judge on July 2, 2008.  A notice of
hearing was issued on July 8, 2008, and the matter was scheduled for hearing on
August 19, 2008.  The Government presented ten exhibits, referred to as Government
Exhibits 1 through 10, which were received without objection. The Applicant called one
witness, and presented eleven exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through K
which were received without objection. The Applicant also testified on his own behalf.
The record remained open until close of business on September 2, 2008, to allow the
Applicant to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted two Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.  DOHA
2
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 27, 2008.  Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 41 years old, unmarried, and has a high school diploma and
some college.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Chemical Crib Technician,
and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
On February 15, 2001, the Applicant was charged with (1) Inflicting Corporal
Injury Spouse, a felony; (2) Prevent Witness Force Threat, a felony; (3) Inflicting
Corporal Injury Spouse, a felony; (4) Prevent Dissuade Witness Force Threat, a felony;
(5) False Imprisonment, a felony; (6) Assault with Deadly Weapon/Instrument, a felony;
and (7) Assault with Deadly Weapon/Instrument, a felony.  The Applicant explained that
he and his wife were living apart for a while under the premise that they were trying to
work on their relationship.  His wife was supposed to be out of town at her parents
house.  The Applicant claims that he walked into her apartment and found her in bed
with another man.  (Tr. p. 43).  The police report of the incident is quite different.  It
mentions nothing about another man being present in bed with the Applicant’s wife at
the time of the incident.  The report states that the Applicant came into her apartment,
uninvited, and into her bedroom while she was sleeping, and asked her who she had
slept with.  She tried to call 911, but he prevented her from doing so by ripping the
telephone cord out of the wall.  He pushed her around, grabbed her thumb hyper-
extending it, and grabbed her by her wrist causing it to bruise.  He punched wholes in a
wall, a hallway closet door, and a picture hanging on the wall, and then left the location.
(See Government Exhibit 3).  The Applicant pled guilty to Charge (1) and nolo
contendere to Charge (2).  He was found guilty of Charges (1) and (2).  Charges (3)
through (7) were dismissed.  The Applicant was sentenced to supervised probation for
three years and to serve 365 days in jail.  He was also required to complete one year of
domestic violence counseling and pay restitution.  The Applicant has satisfied all of the
court’s sentencing requirements and actually served four months and fifteen days in jail
before he was released early under county parole probation in August 2002.         
On January 4, 2005, the Applicant was charged with Battery Against Former
Spouse/Fiancee, a misdemeanor.  The Applicant explained that he and his girlfriend
had gotten into an argument after having consumed alcohol.  She wanted to drive the
Applicant home, however, the Applicant believed that she was too intoxicated to drive
and he obstructed her from getting into her car.  He then began walking home.  The
Applicant pled nolo contendere to the charge and was found guilty.  He was sentenced
to 15 days in jail and was placed on probation for three years.  He was required to
perform 12 hours of community service and to attend domestic violence counseling.
The Applicant has satisfied all of the courts sentencing requirements including paying
his restitution of $520.00 on August 15, 2006.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit F and G).  He
3
was released from summary probation on May 12, 2008.  (See Government Exhibit 5,
and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B). 
The Applicant testified that his domestic violence counseling has been very
helpful to him.  He believes that his poor choices in the past will not be repeated
because he has learned to control his impulses.  (Tr. p. 79).
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant’s financial affairs of the past include a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy that
he filed on February 25, 1997.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  He was over-extended in
credit card debt and was laid off from his job for about two months in 1995.  Following
his layoff, he found work, but the pay was not good, and even with his wife working he
was unable to keep up with their monthly expenses.  In addition to the credit card debt,
the Applicant owed State and Federal taxes for miscalculating he and his wife’s
withholding deductions.  His debts were discharged on June 19, 1997.
The Applicant remained indebted to ten separate creditors totaling approximately
$10,000.00.  The debt included a federal tax lien in the amount of $3,700.00, telephone
bills in the amount of $241.00, credit card debt in the amount of $1,620.00, $773.00,
$167.00, $119.00, $1,771.00, and $1,679.00.  (See Government Exhibits 7, 8 and 9).
He attributes his indebtedness to a period of unemployment, his ex-wife’s habit of living
beyond her means, and the cost of the divorce.  
Since his divorce in 2002, he had been able to pay off all but two of the accounts
set forth in the SOR.  (See Applicant’s Exhibits E, I, J and K).  The two remaining debts
set forth in allegations 1(c), and 1(h), of the SOR total approximately $3,000.00. With
regard to these two debts, the Applicant has set up payment plans and is paying the
debts on a monthly basis.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit C and D).  
Applicant’s current financial report indicates that he can pay his monthly
expenses without difficulty.  He is scheduled to earn approximately $66,000.00 this
year.  He is also current with all of his other monthly obligations including his child
support that is $625.00 monthly for two children that is automatically deducted out of his
payroll account.   
The Applicant’s supervisor, who has known the Applicant for five years testified
that he supervises about sixteen people and the Applicant falls within the top one-third
as far as job performance goes.  He does not know the particulars of the criminal
matters, but is aware of two altercations involving the Applicant’s wife on one occasion,
and his fiancé on another.  He states that the Applicant has put his financial problems
behind him, as he has recently purchased a house, and the truck he had been driving
was not economical so he turned it in for a more economic car.  He is recommended for
a position of trust as it would open up more opportunities for the Applicant.  (Tr. pp. 24 -
40). 
4
The Applicant also received a commendation form his company on February 5,
2008 for high level of professionalism on the job and his contributions to the company.
(See Applicant’s Exhibit B).
A letter from the Applicant dated August 19, 2008 indicates that he has always
been involved in his children extra-curricular activities and has volunteered in the
community for a number of posts including, but not limited to Boy Scout Pack Leader
2002, Super Science Saturday School Competition Judge, Soccer Coach for eight
years, Little League Board of Directors , Girls Softball Coach and T-ball coach for two
years to name a few.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit A). 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation; 
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h.  The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.   The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
6
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct and financial difficulties that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J) and financial considerations
(Guideline F).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct and been financially irresponsible.  This
evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The Applicant’s criminal history involves two felony convictions for Spousal
Abuse in 2001.  Four years later, in 2005, he was convicted of Battery upon a Spouse, a
misdemeanor.  Admittedly, he has undergone counseling for domestic abuse, spent four
months and fifteen days of a year sentence in jail for one offense, fifteen days in jail for
the other, and paid restitution in both cases.  His last conviction occurred only three
years ago.  In May 2008, just three months before the hearing, he completed his three
years of summary probation for his second offense.  Given the serious nature of the
offenses, and their recency, more time is needed in rehabilitation and without incident,
to prove that he will not revert to his old criminal ways.  At this time, the Applicant does
not meet the eligibility for access to classified information.    
7
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, disqualifying conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted applies.  None of the mitigating Conditions are applicable. 
With regard to the Applicant’s poor financial history, it appears that is was not
entirely his fault.  His ex-wife’s excessive spending, his period of unemployment and
their divorce caused most of their financial problems.  Presently, the Applicant has paid
off all but two of the debts and has made payment arrangements with the creditors and
is making payments to pay them off.  He plans to continue paying the debts until they
are paid in full.  He understands the importance of paying his bills on time and he is not
living beyond his means.  Under the circumstances, he has made a good faith effort to
resolve his indebtedness, and there is sufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation; and 19.(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ration,
and/or other financial analysis apply.  Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply. 
The Applicant has demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs.
In the event that the Applicant does not continue to pay his delinquent debts according
to the payment plan or sooner if possible, his security clearance will be in immediate
jeopardy. This Applicant has paid or is currently paying his delinquent debts.  In this
regard, he has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
   
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating
that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.
8
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 for the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Paragraph 2 is found for the Applicant.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1 Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2 For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j: For the Applicant.
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
