                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-05377
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 18, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On October 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines E, F and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 5, 2007, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 31, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant is indebted to Capital One Bank in the approximate amount of
$1,482.00 on a delinquent account opened in 1999 and charged off in 2000 (Exhibit 6).
In response to interrogatories sent to him by DOHA (Exhibit 7), applicant stated this
debt was “not correct.”
Applicant is indebted to Unifund in the approximate amount of $5,966.00. This
debt was placed for collection with Unifund by Providian. Applicant opened the
Providian account in 1999, and it went delinquent in 2000. During an interview with an
OPM investigator in 2007, applicant stated the Providian credit card debt “could have
belonged” to him. He further stated that even if were determined to be his debt he is not
sure he would pay it. In his response to the SOR, he stated that the “Providian account
was an erroneous entry.”
Applicant is indebted to NCOINOMED in the approximate amount of $1,761.00
on an account placed for collection.
Applicant is indebted to Credit Protection in the approximate amount of $52.00
on a delinquent account referred for collection by Susquehanna Communication in
2001. During his interview with the OPM investigator, applicant stated this was for a
cable bill that he did not pay before moving out of the country. In his response to the
SOR, he stated this debt was “cleared” prior to leaving the U.S. and the account was
closed.
Applicant is indebted to Alltel Pennsylvania in the approximate amount of
$483.00 on an account that was referred to FRST COLL SRV for collection in 2001.
During the interview with the OPM investigator, applicant stated this debt was for a
phone bill that was not paid prior to he and his family moving out of the country. In his
response to the SOR, applicant stated “this bill will have to be reviewed.”
Applicant is indebted to Cavalry in the approximate amount of $11,903.00. This
auto debt was referred to Cavalry for collection by Americredit in 2002. According to
applicant’s statement to the OPM investigator, “this could be the debt remaining after
[one of applicant’s vehicles] was sold after repossession. Applicant blames the lender
for the problem and will not pay the debt.
Applicant is indebted to DEFENSE on a government debt in the approximate
amount of $1,878.00. In his response to the SOR, applicant stated he “is not sure what
this account is for.”
A Personal Financial Statement from January 2007 indicates applicant had a
positive monthly cash flow of approximately $3,704.00. In his response to the SOR
applicant disputed this information. He explained that this figure included his wife’s
monthly income, but for privacy reasons did not include her debts.
3
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaire for national security positions
(EQNSP) in January 2006. In response to two questions on the EQNSP, applicant
denied that (1) in the prior seven years he had been over 180 days delinquent on any
debt and (2) he was then over 90 days delinquent on any debts. As documented above,
applicant was well over 180 days delinquent on many debts when he completed the
EQNSP. In his response to the SOR, applicant stated he did not list his debts on the
EQNSP “because at the time [he] purchased his home [in December 2005] [he] was told
that most of the debts on [his] credit report had been charged off and [he] assumed [he]
did not need to list these debts as they were charged off.” I find that applicant
intentionally provided the false information.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Under Paragraph c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise security
concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a long history of an inability or
unwillingness to pay his debts. Accordingly, these disqualifying conditions are
applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph a. may apply where
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s failure to honor his
financial obligations is both recent and frequent. The evidence does not support a
finding that his financial irresponsibility will not recur. Accordingly, this mitigation
condition is not applicable.
Under Paragraph b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
presented no credible evidence that would justify application of this mitigating condition.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph c. This mitigation condition does not apply.
Paragraph d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” This mitigating
condition does not apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
5
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant intentionally provided false,
material information on an EQNSP.
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I
considered each of them and conclude none apply.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 31.c., an “allegation or admission
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s intentional misrepresentation
of material facts on the 2006 EQNSP (a felony under 18 U.S.C. 1001) raise these two
disqualifying conditions.
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. I have considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
6
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who has
a history of not meeting his financial obligations. In addition, he lied to the Government
in January 2006 when he denied any delinquent debt. Applicant’s inability or
unwillingness to honor his financial obligations and to be truthful about them is serious
and recent, and preclude findings that applicant’s financial difficulties will not recur and
that applicant is unlikely to provide false information to the Government in the future.
Based on the foregoing, I conclude applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns
arising from Guidelines E, F and J.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
