 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05939 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns but failed to mitigate 
the Personal Conduct concerns raised by her false answers in a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions in 2006, and in her response to interrogatories in 2007. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On May 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 12, 2008, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted the government’s written case on July 11, 2008. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 19, 2008. She responded with an 
undated letter and two attached performance appraisals. Department Counsel did not 
object to her response. I have marked Applicant’s response as Exhibits (Ex.) A through 
C, and they are admitted. I received the case assignment on September 3, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
the same company since 2006. She attended community college. She served in the 
U.S. military from 1995 to 1997, and was honorably discharged. Applicant is divorced 
and has a five-year-old child.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested on April 24, 2004, and charged with operating while 
intoxicated (OWI). She pled guilty on May 18, 2004, to operating while impaired by 
liquor. She was sentenced to one day in jail, with credit for one day of time served, 
ordered to pay fines and costs of $1,035, and to attend outpatient treatment.2  
 
 Applicant attended treatment. Her discharge summary dated August 5, 2004, 
stated: 
 
Progress/Lack of Progress Client reports great progress. She is no 
longer using alcohol or marijuana. She reports feeling better physically 
and emotionally. Client attended 8 sessions of outpatient therapy. She 
appears highly motivated to staying free of drugs and alcohol.3 
 
Applicant was recommended to continue to attend weekly Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. The final diagnosis included alcohol abuse and marijuana abuse. The 
discharge summary included a “Clinician’s Signature” by an “MSW,” which normally 
refers to a master’s degree in social work.4 I find that Applicant used marijuana an 
indeterminate number of times prior to August 2004. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges “[i]n a report of medical history dated December 17, 1994 
[Applicant] admitted to being a marijuana user.” Applicant admitted the allegation but 
qualified her admission by stating “I do not recall the incident in Paragraph 1.a, but I do 
believe you have documentation to support it so, I do not deny it.” The government did 
not provide independent evidence of this allegation in the FORM. She reiterated in her 
response to the FORM that she did not recall using drugs in 1994. 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, 7. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on May 15, 2006. She denied using any illegal controlled substance, 
including marijuana, during the previous seven years.5 This was an intentionally false 
answer. 
 
 Applicant responded to interrogatories on June 12, 2007. She answered “no” to 
the question that asked if she had “used any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, 
hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP) and/ or any Cannabis (to include marijuana and 
hashish), except prescribed by a licensed physician?” This was an intentionally false 
answer. Applicant stated that she provided the false information because “I very 
desperately want the job I currently have and this is why I omitted any drug use.”6 
 
Applicant’s job from 2004 through 2006 required random drug testing, which she 
passed. She moved to a different state in 2006. She stated that she will never use 
marijuana again and she would readily submit to any random drug testing. She further 
stated “I admit and deeply regret the mistakes I have made and I will gladly accept any 
consequences that come with it.” Her performance appraisals reflect excellent job 
performance during the last two years.7   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Items 3, 7. 
 
7 AE A-C. 
 
 
4 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;   
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
5 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
and 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program. 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession8 and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) 
as disqualifying conditions. The final diagnosis upon her discharge from treatment 
included marijuana abuse. The clinician was an MSW, but it is unclear who made the 
actual diagnosis. The evidence is insufficient to completely qualify as a disqualifying 
condition under either AG ¶ 25(d) or (e).  
 
Three Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana prior to August 2004. How much and how often is 
unclear because she falsified her response to interrogatories. There is no evidence that 
she has used illegal drugs in the last four years. She receives some credit under AG ¶ 
26(a). She moved to a different state in 2006. She signed a statement of intent that she 
will not use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) is applicable. She completed a court-
ordered treatment program. Her clinician wrote that “[s]he appears highly motivated to 
staying free of drugs and alcohol.” That is commendatory but is insufficient to qualify as 
                                                          
8 Drugs must be possessed in order to be used. 
 
 
6 
 
a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. AG ¶ 26(d) is partially 
applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified her SF 86 in 2006. She lied in her response to 
interrogatories in June 2007. Both of the above disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all the potential mitigating conditions. Applicant submitted her 
SF 86 in May 2006. She deliberately failed to disclose her past drug use. She again 
provided false information in 2007. Applicant has not submitted sufficient credible 
information to establish any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana prior to 
 
8 
 
2004. There is no evidence that she has used illegal drugs since then. She intentionally 
falsified her SF 86 in 2006, when she failed to list her drug use. She compounded her 
wrongdoing by again providing false information in her June 2007 response to 
interrogatories. I considered Applicant’s military service and her excellent job 
performance. However, her repeated dishonesty calls in question her judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
