 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 07-07434 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Alan Perkins, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. He failed to mitigate personal conduct concerns arising from his 
falsification of his public trust position application. Eligibility for a public trust position 
and access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Public Trust Position Application (SF85P) (GE 4) on 
October 10, 2006.1 On March 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2  
1  Applicant submitted an Application for Federal Employment (SF 171) on Jan. 2, 1990 (GE 1); a 
Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) on May 15, 1990 (GE 2), a Security Clearance Application 
in June 2004 (AE 7), and an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on Jun. 23, 
2008 (GE 5). The falsification allegation concerns only Applicant’s October 2006 SF85P. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2008, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on June 10, 2008. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on June 16, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 9, 
2008. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were received without 
objection (Tr. 32). Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented one witness, and 
submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 7, which were received without objection (Tr. 23, 35). 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 18, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The Government withdrew the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c - 1.f; ¶ 2; and ¶¶ 3.b 
and 3.c (Tr. 17-19).3 I did not address these allegations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b with 
explanations. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.a. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, including 
Applicant’s demeanor, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior acquisitions analyst employed by a Government 
contractor. While in high school, Applicant worked as a summer intern for a Government 
agency and received access to classified information at the top secret level (Tr. 41). He 
attended college from 1991 to 1996, and received two Bachelor’s degrees with 
concentrations in finance and international business (Tr. 5). He married his wife in 1996 
and divorced her in 2002. He has a 12-year-old-daughter from this marriage. He shares 
legal custody of his daughter with his ex-wife (Tr. 82). 
 
After college, he worked from 1996 to 2000 as a financial analyst for a U.S. 
Government agency in a position of trust (Tr. 78). Thereafter, he worked as pricing 
analyst for one year, and then worked numerous jobs as bartender, server, and in the 
Information Technology field (GE 5). In 2005, he started working as a contract specialist 
for a Government contractor. Since June 2006, he has been working for his current 
employer, another Government contractor, in a position of trust. Applicant has been 
working in a position of trust for the last four years (Tr. 7). 
 
Applicant’s references included two directors and four senior military officers (AE 
1-6). Five of them have known him and observed his performance and character for at 
 
2  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3  See Appellate Exhibit 2, Government’s Notice, dated June 3, 2008. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
least two years. One colonel has known Applicant since 1996, and supervised him for 
approximately seven years. Applicant is considered a hard-working and intelligent 
employee, and an honest man who takes his job seriously. All of his references lauded 
his organization skills, efficiency, competence, and communication skills. In their 
opinion, Applicant always displays the highest degree of integrity and impeccable work 
ethic. In their opinion, he is trustworthy and displays sound judgment. All of his 
references recommended him for a position of trust. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his April 2007 response to DOHA interrogatories (GE 9), two 
credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 2006 (GE 7), and 2007 (GE 8), a 1999 Federal tax 
lien, and his 2006 public trust application. The SOR alleges that Applicant filed for 
bankruptcy protection in 2000, and that he had a Federal tax lien imposed as a result of 
a money judgment granted against him in a civil law suit brought by the U.S. 
Government. The SOR also alleges Applicant falsified his public trust application by 
deliberately failing to disclose his bankruptcy and tax lien. 
 
Applicant’s father worked over 20 years for a Government agency as a budget 
analyst in charge of a large budget program.4 Around 1989-1990, while Applicant was in 
high school, his father set up a ghost company and named Applicant’s mother, 
Applicant, and his siblings as officers of the corporation. From 1991 to 1996, Applicant’s 
father made false claims and statements to his agency and his ghost company received 
over 6 million dollars in illegal/unauthorized payments.5 
 
The U.S. Government brought a civil law suit against Applicant’s father, the ghost 
company and all family members involved with the ghost company. The United States 
alleged Applicant’s family spent and dissipated the monies falsely obtained and, when 
they learned their misappropriation had been discovered, they destroyed evidence and 
secreted assets to impede the Government’s recovery and prosecution efforts. 
Applicant and his family denied the allegations. When questioned about the ghost 
company activities and the sources of their income, they asserted their right against 
self-incrimination.  
 
In May 1999, a Court granted summary judgment against Applicant for 
$5,530,805. In October 1999, the U.S. Government filed a tax lien against Applicant 
based on the judgment and started garnishing his wages. Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
protection in August 2000 and was discharged of his debts in December 2000. In April 
2001, Applicant entered into a settlement agreement with the U.S. Government which 
required Applicant to sell his home and any and all property of value to reimburse the 
Government (Tr. 43). After a settlement was reached, the garnishment of his wages 
stopped and the tax lien was removed. However, the settlement will not be concluded 
4  His father suffers from muscular dystrophy. He is bound to a wheel chair, and requires the use 
of a respirator and colostomy bag (Tr. 40). 
 
5  GE 9 is the source of the facts in the next three paragraphs, unless otherwise stated. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
until Applicant’s father dies and his estate, insurance proceeds, and Applicant’s 
grandfather’s estate trust are surrendered to the U.S. Government. 
 
Applicant explained that the civil judgment, wage garnishments, tax lien, attorney 
fees, and his wife’s filing for divorce and leaving him with the household expenses 
forced him to file for bankruptcy protection (Tr. 38). 
 
In June 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (AE 7), in 
which he disclosed his 2000 bankruptcy filing;6 that his wages had been garnished in 
2000 by the U.S. Depepartment of Justice; and that he had an unpaid judgment 
resulting from the civil law suit brought against him by the Government. In his answer to 
question 36, he denied that in the last seven years he had a lien placed against him. He 
explained this answer as an honest mistake. 
 
In October 2006, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (GE 4). 
In response to question 19 (asking whether he, or a company over which he exercised 
some control, filed for bankruptcy, . . . was subject to a tax lien, or had a judgment 
rendered against him for a debt), he answered “No,” and deliberately failed to disclose 
the 1999 judgment obtained by the Government, the tax lien placed against him, and his 
2000 bankruptcy filing and discharge. 
 
Applicant strongly denied he ever intended to misrepresent the facts or lie in his 
public trust application. He claimed he disclosed all the missing information to a 
Government investigator during an interview conducted after he submitted his public 
trust application (Tr. 45). He also noted he had disclosed all the missing information in 
his 2004 Security Clearance Application (AE 7).  
 
Applicant offered several explanations for his failure to disclose the required 
information, i.e., he mixed up the dates (Tr. 44, 61); he made an honest mistake and 
“lumped” the date of the judgment (May 1999) with the bankruptcy (filed August 2000) 
and, he believed the bankruptcy and tax lien were seven years old and, as such, not 
subject to disclosure (Tr. 65-66); he believed the garnishments and the tax lien were 
“water under the bridge” and he did not have to disclose them because he had reached 
a settlement agreement with the Government and the garnishment of wages was 
stopped and the tax lien was removed (Tr. 62, 67). He stated: “. . . I was trying to figure 
out if I could finally put all this stuff behind me. I mean, it was such a long time ago. 
Everything was finalized. It’s all, and it’s all water under the bridge . . . And if I had 
waited another nine months, this would have been seven years ago (Tr. 67-68).” 
 
Applicant vehemently asserted he had no knowledge and never suspected his 
father was defrauding the U.S. Government. Applicant benefited from the proceeds of 
his father’s fraud because his father gave him the down payment for his home, paid for 
his college education, he used the ghost company’s cars, and was paid a salary (Tr. 
58). 
6  At his hearing, Applicant clarified he mistakenly wrote the wrong date in his 2008 e-QIP (Tr. 
47). He filed for bankruptcy protection once in August 2000. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”7 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”8 The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.9  
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”10 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
7  See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.   
 
8  See Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
9  See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.    
 
10  See Department of the Army v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528, 531 (1988). 
 
6 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that an Applicant’s  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
 AG & 19 lists nine conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; 
 
7 
 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by 
subject's known legal sources of income; and 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
 Applicant was an officer of a ghost company created by his father which 
defrauded the Government by deceptive and illegal financial practices. He was 20 years 
old when his father started defrauding the Government in 1991, and 25 years old when 
the fraud was discovered in 1996. Applicant, his parents, and sibling benefited from this 
fraud. He had a $5,530,805 judgment filed against him in May 1999, which is still 
outstanding. Although he entered into a settlement agreement with the Government, the 
settlement will not be final for an unknown number of years. His bankruptcy filing 
resulted from the expenses associated with his attorney fees, his wage garnishments, 
tax lien, the surrendering of all his valuables to the Government, and the expenses 
associated with his divorce. AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 
AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan 
statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust), apply in this case.  
 
 AG & 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), and the record 
evidence as a whole, I conclude the following mitigating condition applies.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 Applicant’s father defrauded the Government from 1991 to 1996. Applicant’s 
implication in his father’s illegal actions and his benefiting from them also stopped in 
1996. There is no evidence showing Applicant knowingly participated in his father 
fraudulent scheme. His financial problems and resulting bankruptcy filing were the result 
of his father’s actions and not Applicant’s. Under the circumstances, I find his 
questionable behavior to be remote and unlikely to recur. His current CBRs do not show  
questionable financial behavior. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
AG & 15. 
 
The record evidence established Applicant deliberately failed to disclose relevant 
information in his answers to question 19 of his public trust application. Numerous 
factors weighed in my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant=s age, his 
level of education, his employment history, his familiarity working with the Government 
and the security clearance system, the magnitude and seriousness of the fraud 
committed by his father and the resulting legal actions Applicant faced, and his 
demeanor and testimony.  
 
Applicant knew or should have known the importance of accurate completion of 
his public trust position application, and nevertheless failed to provide information that 
was material to making an informed trustworthiness determination. Disqualifying 
Conditions (DC) 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . ., and DC 16(e): personal conduct or 
concealment of information about one=s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress . . ., apply. 
 
I specifically considered all Guideline E Mitigating Conditions and conclude that 
none apply. Applicant=s falsification is recent, and his favorable information is not 
sufficient to fully apply any of the mitigating conditions. I specifically considered that 
Applicant had previously disclosed the omitted information in his June 2004 Security 
Clearance Application. He knew from past experience that he was required to disclose 
the information in his public trust application. Notwithstanding, he knowingly decided to 
omit the required information because he “was trying to put all that stuff behind [him].” 
Considering the legal ordeal Applicant faced from 1996 to 2001, his education, and job 
experience, I find it difficult to believe that he could have made an honest mistake. 
Furthermore, he failed to establish that he disclosed the omitted information to the 
Government investigator prior to him being confronted with the falsification. Guideline E 
is decided against Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a),  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant successfully worked in 
positions of trust for defense contractors for approximately nine years. He is a hard-
working and intelligent employee. He is considered a man of integrity, trustworthy, and 
of sound judgment. All of his references recommended him for a position of trust. He is 
a dedicated father who takes care of his daughter.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b & 1.c:    Withdrawn 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
