 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-02689 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding handling protected 
information and personal conduct.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 3, 2005, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an ESPQ version of a Security Clearance Application (SF 86). On November 8, 2007, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On December 29, 2005, the President promulgated revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information, and on 
August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and Department 
of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended and modified (Regulation), in which the SOR was issued on or after 
September 1, 2006.  The AG applies to Applicant’s case because his SOR was issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on November 25, 2007. In a sworn, written 
statement, dated November 26, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on April 8, 2008, and the case was assigned to 
me on April 11, 2008. A Notice of Hearing was issued that same day, and I convened 
the hearing, as scheduled, on May 8, 2008. 
 
During the hearing, three Government exhibits and three Applicant exhibits were 
received and admitted, some over objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on May 16, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the factual allegations (¶¶ 
1.b., 1.c., and 2.a.) of the SOR with explanations, and denied the remaining allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain a SECRET security clearance.  He has been employed as an integration and test 
engineer by the same government contractor since July 2005.1 Prior to his current 
employment he was on active duty with the U.S. Navy from August 1999 until June 
2004, and honorably discharged as a Petty Officer 2nd Class (E-5)2; a field engineer with 
another defense contractor from June 2004 until April 2005; and unemployed from April 
2005 until July 2005.3 
 
There are two differing scenarios regarding an incident that transpired on March 
23, 2005, which is the sole focus of the SOR.  The first scenario, described below, is 
that of the Applicant, and is supported by his Answer to SOR and testimony; the second 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Nov. 3, 2005), at 2. 
 
2 Id. at 3-4 
 
3 Id. at 2. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
 so.  
                                                          
one, from the then-employer, supported by an Adverse Information Report, is described 
thereafter. 
 
On March 23, 2005, Applicant was offered a job from a competing defense 
contractor program manager which would have increased his then-current salary by 
$20,000.00.4 Applicant informed his then-current program manager (PM) and asked if 
his employer could match the offer. His PM was apparently “furious” at the competitor 
because he had already lost another employee to them.5   
 
That same evening, at about 10:30 p.m., after having dinner, Applicant and a 
female companion (who was a cleared employee working for the same Command at 
another location)6 entered the closed military facility after passing two checkpoints, 
including a gate guard who touched Applicant’s badge. Their original purpose for being 
on the facility at that time was for her to drop Applicant off for work and then borrow his 
automobile.7 Instead, they drove around the perimeter of the base and parked for a 
scenic view overlooking the ocean.8 Applicant’s companion said she needed to use the 
restroom so they drove to the unsecured building where he worked, entered it, and he 
escorted her to the restroom which was outside of the secured laboratory.9 He never 
took, or attempted to take, her into the laboratory itself.10 Applicant called to a colleague 
to meet her in the hallway.  Shortly thereafter, they departed the area and drove back to 
the restaurant to pick up her car.11  
 
Applicant had worked his shift from 10 p.m. the previous day until 6 a.m. that 
day.  The established policy was to have flexible hours if anyone worked overtime 
earlier in the week, and it was noted on the time card.12 Applicant did not work the 
entire period he was scheduled to do 13
 
The following day, a security stand down day,14 his PM informed Applicant that 
his employer could offer him a salary increase, but because the amount did not match 
4 Tr. at 48. 
 
5 Answer to SOR, dated Nov. 26, 2007, at 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 33. 
 
7 Id. at 34. 
 
8 Id. 
 
9 Id. at 34-35, 37. 
 
10 Id. at 35-36. 
 
11 Answer to SOR, supra note 5, at 2-3. 
 
12 Tr. at 30. 
 
13 Id. at 39. 
 
14 Id. at 57. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
the competitor’s offer, Applicant stated he was still undecided as to what his decision 
would be.15  
 
On March 29, 2005, Applicant’s PM called regarding the decision, and Applicant 
told him he decided to submit his two week notice. The PM told him to type his letter of 
resignation stating his last day of work, and Applicant did so.16  He also commented 
about the “incident” of March 23rd and added that if Applicant could keep the next two 
weeks clean, he would have his “going-away” party the next week.  Two hours later, 
Applicant was told he was being placed on administrative leave until the “incident” could 
be resolved. That evening, the PM came to Applicant’s apartment and requested 
statements from Applicant and his female friend and picked up Applicant’s badge.17  
The statements were e-mailed as requested.18   
 
The following day, the PM called Applicant and asked to meet him as the security 
office.  Applicant was questioned by an investigator and subsequently advised by the 
PM that “. . . hopefully they just revoke access for 6 months and you can continue your 
career and we can still be friends.”19 The end result was that Applicant was terminated 
from his job, effective March 31, 2005.20 Although Applicant had anticipated 
commencing employment with his new employer on April 18, 2005,21 because he was 
now barred from the facility, the offer was withdrawn.22  
 
The scenario offered by the then-employer Facility Security Officer is markedly 
different from that described above.   
 
On March 23, 2005, at some time between 10:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m., Applicant 
“knowingly and willfully snuck an unauthorized girlfriend onto the . . . Naval Base and 
attempted to bring her into a classified lab. . . .  Another employee stopped [Applicant] 
from bringing his guest into the classified lab and told him to get her off of the base.”23 
 
The issue of the falsified timecard was described as follows: 
 
15 Answer to SOR, supra note 5, at 1. 
 
16 Tr. at 53-55. 
  
17 Id. at 64. 
 
18 Answer to SOR, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
19 Id. 
 
20 Tr. at 38, 65. 
 
21 Id. at 60. 
 
22 Id. at 67. 
 
23 Government Exhibit 2 (Adverse Information Report, dated Apr. 5, 2005). 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
. . . He then left the base but did not return until approximately 3:00 a.m.  It 
was further uncovered that [Applicant] falsified his timecard given that he 
reported he worked the hours of 9:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. but was off the 
base from approximately 9:30 p.m. to 3:00 a.m.24 
 
Applicant’s candor was characterized as follows: 
 
. . . His version of the events has also changed several times and what we 
were told by [Applicant] is slightly different than what he told the . . . base 
investigators.25 
 
As of April 5, 2005, the incident had been reported to the Command security 
office and “is currently under investigation”26, and Applicant’s access privileges to the 
base and lab were temporarily revoked until further notice. Applicant was put on 
administrative leave immediately so that the then-employer might investigate the 
incident.27 Nevertheless, with the understanding that Applicant had previously given 
notice of his intent to terminate his employment on March 29, 2005, it was decided that  
he should be terminated, effective March 31, 2005, because the investigation of the 
incident was apparently completed and something unspecified was “uncovered.”28  
 
While Applicant’s scenario contained some uncertainty regarding the specific 
dates certain actions occurred, his explanation has the ring of truth.  On the other hand, 
while it appears the then-employer, as well as the Command security office, had 
conducted an inquiry or investigation of the incident which occurred on March 23, 2005, 
no such reports of inquiry or investigation, along with interview statements of Applicant 
and witnesses, have been submitted. Instead, there are findings, conclusions, and 
characterizations unsupported by specifics other than what was alleged in the Adverse 
Information Report. 
 
For example, the report stated Applicant “willfully snuck an unauthorized 
girlfriend” onto the base and “attempted to bring her into a classified lab” but was 
stopped by another employee. There is nothing in evidence as to how he “willfully 
snuck” someone on base, or how he “attempted” to bring her into the classified lab, or 
who, and under what circumstances, the unidentified employee stopped him. In 
addition, it is alleged that his version of the events changed several times, but there is 
no explanation as to what his versions were or how they differed. Under the 
circumstances, considering the conflicting interpretations of the actions and the incident, 
as well as the very sparse evidence presented by the Government, I accept Applicant’s 
explanations rather than the Government’s unsupported interpretations of same. 
24 Id. 
  
25 Id. 
 
26 Id. 
 
27 Id. 
 
28 Id. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Since becoming employed by his current employer, Applicant was closely 
monitored by the Facility Security Officer because of the earlier incident with his former 
employer.  After 18 months of “stellar security performance,” Applicant was selected 
and trained to be COMSEC Custodian, a position he handled with “superior results.”29  
He has also been recognized by the Commander, USCENTAF, and his Program 
Manager for his contributions to the mission.30 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”31 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
29 Applicant Exhibit C (Letter from Facility Security Officer, dated May 5, 2008). 
 
30 Applicant Exhibit B (Certificate signed by a Lieutenant General, USAF, and Letter from Program Manager, 
dated January 27, 2007). 
 
31 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of  
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33:       
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 34(g) “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information” is potentially disqualifying. Department Counsel has identified this 
as the sole condition of this particular guideline possibly pertinent to this case,32 and I 
concur. Applicant purportedly violated two rules. First, there was some otherwise 
unidentified and unspecified rule regarding permitting access to the facility when he 
drove onto the base, or as referred to by his then-Facility Security Officer, “snuck” her 
onto the base, during a time period in which he was to work and his companion had no 
legitimate business reason for being there. The actual “rule” has not been specified, 
detailed, discussed, or otherwise offered by the Government. It is impossible to 
determine if a spouse, companion, or driver who accompanies a cleared employee onto 
the base is also violating the supposed rule. According to the Government, at that time, 
her mere presence on the base required advanced permission for her to enter the base, 
regardless of her status.  It should be noted, however, that this aspect of the argument 
is not alleged in the SOR, for the SOR allegation only refers to his “attempt” to bring the 
32 Tr. at 72. 
 
8 
                                      
 
unauthorized person into the classified area elsewhere referred to as the laboratory, but 
not the base itself. 
The other aspect of the case refers to his purported “attempt” to bring his 
companion into the secured laboratory.  The Government has presented an Adverse 
Information Report that Applicant had attempted to do just that, but was prevented from 
doing so by an unidentified employee. Applicant has countered that report with evidence 
in support of his contention that his companion needed to use the restroom so they 
drove to the unsecured building where he worked, entered it, and he escorted her to the 
restroom which was outside of the secured laboratory. He never took, or attempted to 
take, her into the laboratory itself.  Except for the evidence submitted by Applicant, the 
record is silent regarding the location or security status of the restroom. I found 
Applicant’s statement at the hearing to be consistent and credible. Because of the 
paucity of evidence contradicting him, I find that AG ¶ 34(g) is refuted by Applicant’s 
more compelling and plausible evidence. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from handling protected information. Under AG ¶ 35(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the 
behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that 
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  Similarly, AG ¶ 35(b), may apply where “the 
individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now 
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.”   
 In this instance, I will assume the purported “security violations” occurred on 
March 23, 2005—three years before the date of the hearing—and Applicant was briefly 
put on administrative leave and, in part, because he had already submitted his notice 
intending to take another job with a competitor, terminated. Whether his punishment 
and termination were appropriate due to the circumstances, or due to rumor or 
innuendo, or simply retaliation and reprisal for attempting to join a competitor is unclear.  
What is clear is that since that time, after being closely monitored by his current Facility 
Security Officer for 18 months, Applicant was selected and trained to be COMSEC 
Custodian, a position he has handled with “superior results.” Applicant has clearly 
maintained and demonstrated a “positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities.” Considering the totality of the evidence, I find that, assuming AG ¶ 
34(g) is established, then AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
9 
                                      
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, and 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 
16(c), Acredible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information@ may raise security concerns.  
In addition, AG ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, 
release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time or 
resources,” may apply. 
 
10 
                                      
 
Applicant has admitted he “falsified” his timecard pertaining to March 23-24, 
2005, but explained that was the acceptable practice in place with his supervisor 
covering flexible time or overtime work.  If such informal practice was acceptable to the 
supervisor is only one aspect of the issue, because it apparently was not acceptable to 
the employer. Unfortunately, the Adverse Information Report does not address this 
issue other than to say Applicant “falsified his timecard.” As to the falsified timecard, I 
find AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(c), and 16(d) apply in this case. As to the alleged “attempt to bring 
an unauthorized person into the secured laboratory, I find AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(c), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply where the evidence shows Athe 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.@  Also, AG ¶ 17(f) may apply where “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” 
Falsifying a timecard is not a minor offense.  However, in this instance, Applicant 
contends the informal practice was acceptable to his supervisor, even if it may not have 
been acceptable to the employer.  Nevertheless, three years have passed since the 
incident, and it was apparently an isolated action identified by his employer.  Neither 
alleged action by Applicant constituted a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. After 
being under intense scrutiny by his current employer for over 18 months, the 
circumstances have changed, the conduct has not recurred, and it is not likely to recur.  
As to the falsified timecard, I find AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply.  As to the alleged 
“attempt to bring an unauthorized person into the secured laboratory, I find AG ¶¶ 17(c) 
and 17(f) apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.33        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In March 2005, Applicant informed 
his PM of an offer of employment from a competitor, entered the military facility with a 
friend in his automobile, and accompanied her to the unsecured restroom near his 
secured laboratory. Although he was supposed to be working, he apparently had an 
informal flexible work schedule and entered what might be considered constructive 
information on his timecard. Nevertheless, the information was not accurate, and 
Applicant admitted the time card did not contain accurate information. Some form of 
inquiry or investigation was performed and Applicant was placed on administrative leave 
and terminated. As a result, because he was now barred from the facility, the offer of 
employment by the competitor was withdrawn. (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 
2(a)(5), and 2(a)(7).  
 
The two components of the isolated episode, the disputed issue of bringing an 
“unauthorized” person on base and purportedly “attempting” to bring her into a classified 
laboratory, as well as the falsification of the timecard, both occurred over three years 
before the hearing.  Additionally, since that time, Applicant was closely monitored for 18 
months, and eventually selected and trained to be COMSEC Custodian. He has 
handled the position with “superior results.” And, he has clearly maintained and 
demonstrated a “positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” As 
such, there appears to be little likelihood of recurrence and the potential of pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress because of the incident(s) is low. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his handling protected 
information and personal conduct concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
33 Although I find Applicant’s conduct mitigated under the individual guidelines as previously indicated, I also 
separately find security concerns mitigated under the whole person concept. 
 
12 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
