  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-01555
SSN: ---------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 7, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to
an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The SOR
alleges security concerns under Guideline J for criminal conduct. For the reasons
discussed below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 The government’s brief includes several attachments referred to as items. They are referred to as exhibits3
herein. 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date. 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on March 3, 2008, and he
elected a decision without a hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On March 21, 2008, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM)  was mailed to Applicant on March 26, 2008, and it was3
received by him on April 22, 2008. He replied to the FORM within the allowed 30-day
period, and his reply consists of a letter from him as well as eight letters of
recommendation. Those matters are admitted as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to
another administrative judge on July 22, 2008, and it was reassigned to me on
September 2, 2008.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges five incidents of criminal conduct during the period 1990–2005.
In his Answer, Applicant admits four of the five allegations. He denies the allegation in
SOR ¶ 1.b. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for
his current employer since 2004. His current position or job title is help desk technician.
The eight letters of recommendation are highly favorable to Applicant and express the
overall opinion that Applicant is a suitable candidate for a security clearance (Exhibit A).
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct. The five incidents alleged in the SOR
and admitted to by Applicant (except as otherwise noted) are summarized as follows:
• 1990–arrested and charged with grand theft, receiving stolen property, and
carrying a loaded firearm in a public place; all charges were dismissed.
• 1991–arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs,
driving a vehicle while having a .08% or higher blood alcohol, and carrying a
concealed weapon in a vehicle.
3
• 2002–arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs,
driving while having a .08% or higher blood alcohol, and a later charge of failure
to appear. He pleaded guilty to the DUI and the other charges were dismissed. 
• 2002–charged with driving with a suspended license and an unlicensed driver.
Found guilty of the second charge and ordered to pay a fine, fees, and placed on
summary probation for 24 months.
• 2005–arrested and charged with three offenses related to domestic violence.
The 1991 and 2005 incidents are discussed below. 
The one-page court record concerning the 1991 incident indicates the defendant
failed to appear in court and an arrest warrant was issued in June 1991 (Exhibit 8 at 9).
The court record does not indicate the disposition of the charges or the arrest warrant.
The government did not present any record evidence showing the disposition of the
charges or the warrant. And the 1991 incident is not reported in Applicant’s FBI
identification record (Exhibit 6).  
In his Answer, Applicant denied the 1991 incident alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and
explained that it concerned someone else:
This is the first time ever hearing about this. I believe someone else was
using my identity. Prior to this date, it was brought to my attention by the
[police department] that someone else was using my [state] driver license
number [-----123]. I immediately saw investigators at the [local] DMV, and
found out an employee from there had issued my license number to
another person (name unknown). I received a new [state] driver license
number [-----456], which is current today.
Applicant did not present any documentary information to support his explanation, but
he also denied this incident during his background interview (Exhibit 7 at 3).
The most recent incident happened in 2005 when Applicant was arrested and
charged with three offenses relating to domestic violence: (1) battery against a former
spouse/fiancee; (2) willful cruelty to a child; and (3) willful cruelty to a child. The charges
stemmed from an argument between Applicant and his wife that took place in the
presence of children. Applicant explained that his wife slapped him during an argument
and he defended himself by holding up his arms and pushing back (Exhibit 7 at 2). The
police were called and Applicant was arrested based on his wife’s report. In June 2007,
after several court appearances, the charges against Applicant were dismissed based
on his successful completion of a diversion program that required Applicant to satisfy
certain conditions, including completing 45 classes in a certified domestic violence
program and attending 20 meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (Exhibit 8). 
In his reply letter to the FORM, Applicant states the following: (1) that he deeply
regrets the negative experiences of his life; (2) that he looks forward to moving past
those experiences and toward upward mobility for his life, family, and career; (3) that he
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
4
and his wife have gone through their share of disagreements, but they have now
learned how to disagree and still respect each other, and that they have reconciled; and
(4) that he is a loyal and committed employee who desires to obtain a bachelor’s degree
and move to a higher-level position with the company.   
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant5
to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any6
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether7
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting8
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An9
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate10
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme11
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating15
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 16
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”17
 DC 3 is the “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally18
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
5
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity15
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.”  16
In general, a security concern is raised by Applicant’s pattern of criminal conduct.
In particular, DC 1  and DC 3  apply against Applicant as evidenced by his multiple17 18
arrests, charges, and convictions, the most recent of which took place in 2005 and was
resolved in June 2007 when the charges were dismissed. Applicant’s involvement in
criminal conduct over a period of years calls into question his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. 
In reaching this conclusion, however, I find for Applicant on the allegation in SOR
¶ 1.b for the 1991 incident. The evidence supporting this allegation is a one-page court
record. Applicant has rebutted this by his plausible explanation that he was not involved
in this incident. In addition, if the incident was genuine, one would think that it would
 DC 4 is “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time19
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” 
6
have surfaced and been addressed during one of Applicant’s post-1991 arrests. And it
is not reported in the FBI record. Given these circumstances, I am not persuaded that
Applicant was arrested and charged as outlined in SOR ¶ 1.b.
The guideline also contains several conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. The most pertinent is MC 4, which concerns successful evidence of reform
and rehabilitation.  Applicant receives credit for complying with the conditions of the19
diversion program. As a result, the state court dismissed the domestic violence charges
in June 2007. Likewise, he and his wife have reconciled, and he reports that their
relationship is now more stable. Nevertheless, these events are relatively recent
developments and it is too soon to tell if Applicant can establish a long-term record as a
law-abiding citizen. At this time, his four incidents of involvement in criminal
conduct—the most recent of which was resolved last year—militate against a successful
case in reform and rehabilitation. Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against Applicant.
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person
concept, to include Applicant’s favorable evidence, was given due consideration and
that analysis does not support a favorable decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a, c, d, e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
