 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07749 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline I (Psychological 
Conditions). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on November 12, 2002, 
and she received a clearance about five years ago. The exact date of her clearance is 
not reflected in the record. On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to revoke her clearance, citing security concerns under Guideline I. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 21, 2008; answered it on 
May 27, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received 
the request on May 29, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 12, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me on June 13, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 2, 2008, scheduling the hearing for July 24, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX), which was admitted without objection. The record closed upon 
adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.d. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old electrician employed by a defense contractor (Tr. 26). 
She has worked for her current employer and held a clearance for more than five years.   
 
 Applicant has a history of mental health problems. Her parents were divorced 
when she was about four years old, as a result of her father’s brutal assault on her 
mother. Her father moved away and she saw him again only once, when she was seven 
or eight years old. Her mother remarried when she was about five or six years old (GX 2 
at 2). When Applicant was a young teenager she was partially responsible for 
disciplining her younger sister, who retaliated by harassing Applicant, putting needles in 
her bed or chemicals in her face soap (GX 2-3). 
 
 When Applicant was about 16 years old, she tried to control her anxiety and 
panic by burning herself. She did so on two or three occasions. (GX 3 at 2-3). Her 
medical records reflect a suicide attempt by a drug overdose in high school (GX 3 at 
135). 
 
 Applicant now has a “good and bad” relationship with her mother. On the one 
hand, her mother is very critical and hurtful, and she discloses inappropriately intimate 
financial and marital information to Applicant. On the other hand, Applicant finds that 
talking with her mother is one of her best ways of controlling her emotions. Applicant 
talks to her mother about once a week and more frequently when under stress. She told 
a clinical psychologist that when she is with her family she reverts to being “that sad, 
16-year-old teenager” (GX 2-3). 
 
 Applicant grew up on the west coast. She moved to the east coast and her 
present workplace when her husband was transferred. Shortly after she moved to the 
east coast, her insurance stopped paying for her medications and she stopped taking 
them (Tr. 23, 41).  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant and her husband separated after about 18 months of marriage. In June 
2003, she reacted to the stress of her pending divorce by shaving her head and 
attempting suicide by taking an overdose of sleeping pills. The attempt did not work, 
and she awakened in the morning suffering from nausea and dizziness. She went to 
work, where her co-workers noticed her condition and notified her supervisor. She was 
hospitalized in a mental health ward for three days. Upon discharge, she was diagnosed 
with major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, without psychotic features. She was 
given prescriptions for medication and advised to obtain counseling (GX 2 at 5; GX 3 at 
6, 128, and 138). 
 
 In 2004, Applicant, not yet divorced, became pregnant by a man married to 
another woman. She miscarried after about four and a half months. In May 2004, she 
weighted down her clothing, walked to a pier, and started running toward the water. As 
she approached the end of the pier; she decided she did not want to die and stopped. 
She then went to the hospital for help. She was hospitalized for five days and diagnosed 
with major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe without psychotic features (GX 2 at 4; 
GX 3 at 75, 99).  
 
 In May 2006, Applicant was temporarily assigned to a shipyard on the west 
coast, near her family. She had difficulty at work and believed her boss was critical of 
her. She lived with her family, which revived her family-related stresses (Tr. 33-34). She 
stopped taking her medications because she lost contact with her doctor. She had 
misplaced his telephone number and could not remember his name (GX 3 at 9). In late 
May 2006, when she started having suicidal thoughts and began burning herself to 
relieve the stress, she voluntarily sought psychiatric help at a local hospital. She was 
treated and released, but she did not go to work for two days (GX 3 at 9) 
 
When Applicant returned to work, she learned she was about to be disciplined for 
missing work. She returned to the hospital, upset because she thought she was about 
to be fired. She was hospitalized in the mental ward for four or five days and diagnosed 
with post-traumatic stress disorder, chronic; and bipolar disorder, depressed, without 
psychotic features (GX 3 at 88). She was given prescriptions for medications and 
released. She reacted badly to her medications, suffering numbness and loss of 
balance. The dosages were reduced and the adverse reactions ceased (GX 2 at 4; GX 
3 at 7-8).  
 
 Applicant started seeing her current psychologist and psychiatrist in July 2006. 
Their initial diagnosis was bipolar disorder I (GX 3 at 79, 82). 
 
Applicant stopped taking her medications for about a month in November 2006. 
She starting hitting herself and trying to burn herself. She was taken to her psychologist 
by a co-worker after she acted like a “zombie” at work and was crying (GX 3 at 155). 
 
 Between early February 2007 and mid-March 2008, the observations of 
Applicant’s psychologist after every session included a comment that her insight was 
compromised (GX 3 at 13-47). In late October 2007, Applicant’s psychologist noted she 
 
4 
 
 
had stopped taking one of her medications, and he was concerned about the risk of 
bipolar symptoms (GX 3 at 26). In December 2007, her psychologist again noted she 
was not taking her medications unless absolutely necessary, and he wanted her to 
resume taking them regularly to minimize the risk of bipolar symptoms (GX 3 at 21). In 
early January 2008, her psychologist again noted that she was “not fully compliant” with 
her medications (GX 3 at 19-20). In late January 2008, her psychologist noted that she 
was ‘compliant with her meds” and feeling much better (GX 3 at 18).  
 
 In November 2007, Applicant’s drug prescriptions were destroyed when her truck 
caught fire. She attempted to obtain new prescriptions but her doctor did not return her 
telephone calls. Since she had an appointment in two weeks, she decided to “tough it 
out” until her appointment. She described this decision as a “big mistake,” because not 
taking her medications made her physically sick. She testified she had no thoughts of 
injuring herself during this period because she was too sick (Tr. 72).  
 
 In January 2008, the Department of Defense referred Applicant to a clinical 
psychologist for evaluation. This evaluation apparently was triggered when her 
hospitalization on the west coast was reported to her supervisors and the facility 
security officer (Tr. 57-58). The government psychologist diagnosed her with bipolar I 
disorder, most recent episode depressed, severe without psychotic symptoms; and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (GX 2 at 5). His evaluation included the following 
comments: 
 
[A]pplicant’s presentation at this interview suggests no currently significant 
defects in judgment or reliability. When symptomatic, the picture is less 
clear. In reviewing her history, when symptomatic [Applicant’s] patterns of 
suicidality and self-harm signify defects in judgment; however these tend 
to focus on and may even be confined to behaviors that are self-directed. 
No evidence reviewed by this interviewer suggests that she has directed 
any unhealthy behaviors at elements in the workplace. Therefore, though 
such lapses in judgment may be present when symptomatic, these may 
be confined to self-care (GX 2 at 8). 
 
The government psychologist also noted that the cyclical nature of Applicant’s 
disorder is likely to cause some impairment in occupational functioning that could range 
anywhere from a distracted day to inability to function. He concluded that “it is difficult to 
predict what levels of severity might occur in light of Applicant’s current levels of 
therapeutic support,” and that Applicant “could be viewed a struggling with a chronic 
illness whose severity will depend on such factors as adherence to recommended 
treatment and environmental stressors.”  
 
 In mid-June 2008, one of Applicant’s co-workers asked her about her apparent 
increased weight, causing Applicant to “stress out,” She called her psychologist, talked 
to him, and resolved her distress without thoughts of harming herself (Tr. 82-83).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had been in a serious relationship with a 
security guard for a government facility for about a year. They have known each other 
for about four years (Tr. 89). They see each other every four days on his day off (Tr. 24-
25).  
 
On July 1, 2008, about three weeks before the hearing, Applicant and her 
boyfriend had an argument that made her want to escape from the situation. She 
responded by consuming all the ten remaining pills from one of her medications and she 
tried to consume all the pills of a second medication. Her boyfriend knocked the second 
medication out of her hand and took her to a hospital, where she was administered a 
charcoal solution that filtered out the medications. She was held overnight and then 
released (Tr. 46-50). She stayed with her boyfriend for three days and then returned to 
work (Tr. 52). Her boyfriend testified and corroborated her account of the incident (Tr. 
90-97). 
 
On July 15, 2008, Applicant’s clinical psychologist and her psychiatrist reported 
that she was being treated for bipolar I disorder and that she had responded well to 
psychotropic medication during the past two years (AX A). They were aware of her drug 
overdose two weeks earlier (Tr. 67). Nevertheless, they stated, “Her prognosis is good 
at this time as noticed by the way she has made good use of the supports provided to 
her.”  
 
Addressing a concern alleged in the SOR about adhering to her treatment 
program, Applicant’s psychologist and psychiatrist also stated that she kept all her 
appointments except on rare occasions when she had car problems, concerns about 
demonstrating a good work record, or major family events (AX A at 1). Applicant 
testified she is “too afraid” to stop taking her medications (Tr. 79). 
 
Applicant sees her psychologist once a week, and she sees her psychiatrist 
every one or two months (Tr. 34-36). Her medications are constantly being adjusted in 
an effort to find the correct balance (Tr. 37, 43-44). According to her psychologist, her 
medications were reviewed 23 times during a two-year period (AX A).  
 
Applicant also has started seeing a counselor to whom she was referred through 
the employee assistance program, in addition to her regular psychologist and 
psychiatrist (Tr. 58-61). She testified she started seeing this counselor to have a second 
opinion and because the counselor “seems to be more on the feeling side of the 
spectrum,” compared to her regular psychologist, who is more clinical (Tr. 81). 
 
Applicant testified she does not “fit in quite well” at her workplace. She filed a 
complaint against a boss who molested her in 2003, and she believes her co-workers 
treated her unkindly because they thought she might file complaints against them as 
well (Tr. 79). She has been transferred to a job where she has less contact with her co-
workers (Tr. 62-63). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s support system consists of her psychologist, psychiatrist, her newest 
counselor, her mother, her boyfriend, and a co-worker who has experience in 
counseling. She called the co-worker when she had bad side effects from her 
medications while on the west coast, and he advised her to return to the hospital, which 
she did (Tr. 84). Her boyfriend testified they “talk a lot” about her mood swings and her 
stress at work and with her family (Tr. 101). 
 
 Applicant testified her employer is aware of her mental health issues. She 
provided the employer’s medical facility with her list of medications, notified her union, 
and sought help through the company’s employee assistance program (Tr. 58-59). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was diagnosed in January 2008 with bipolar I 
disorder (most recent episode depressed, severe without psychotic symptoms) and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (SOR ¶ 1.a); that she has received treatment and 
medications since July 2006 for post-traumatic stress disorder I and bipolar disorder II 
(SOR ¶ 1.b); that she has periodically stopped taking medications and attending therapy 
sessions against medical advice (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that, as a result of her mental health 
disorders, she was treated or hospitalized for self-mutilation and suicidal thoughts, 
gestures, or attempts in November 2006, June 2006, May 2006, May 2004, and June 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
 With respect to SOR ¶ 1.b, alleging a diagnosis of “Post Traumatic Stress 
Disorder I and Bipolar Disorder II,” the DSM IV does not list post-traumatic stress 
disorder with a Roman numeral suffix, and all the evidence of record shows Applicant 
was diagnosed with bipolar disorder I, not bipolar disorder II. With respect to SOR ¶ 1.c, 
there is evidence that she stopped taking her medications, and there is evidence she 
sometimes rescheduled therapy sessions for good cause, but there is no evidence she 
simply failed to attend her therapy sessions. In all other respects, the allegations in the 
SOR have been established by substantial evidence. 
 The security concern under Guideline I is set out in AG ¶ 27 as follows: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
 
8 
 
 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
A potentially disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by 
“behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that 
is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally 
unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior.” AG ¶ 
28(a). A potentially disqualifying condition also may be raised by “an opinion by a duly 
qualified mental health professional that the individual has a condition not covered 
under any other guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.” (AG 
¶ 28(b). Applicant’s mental health history raises these two disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 28(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated if “the identified condition 
is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan.” AG ¶ 29(a). Although Applicant is 
undergoing therapy, receiving medications, and has established a support structure, 
she has not established that her condition is “readily controllable.” Her medication is still 
being adjusted, and her suicide attempt on July 1, 2008, demonstrates that her 
condition is not yet under control. She has generally complied with her therapy 
schedule, but there have been periods where she has not taken her prescribed 
medications. Some of those periods were beyond her control, such as the time when 
she could not afford the medications, the time on the west coast when she could not 
contact her prescriber, and the time when her prescriptions were destroyed by the truck 
fire; but there is no apparent good reason for her failure to take her medications during 
the periods from late October 2007 through early January 2008. I conclude AG ¶ 29(a) 
is not established. 
 
Security concerns also can be mitigated if “the individual has voluntarily entered 
a counseling or treatment program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the 
individual is currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional.” AG ¶ 29(b). Applicant is voluntarily receiving 
treatment. Her condition appears to be “amenable to treatment,” but not fully 
controllable. She is receiving counseling and has received a favorable prognosis from 
her psychologist and psychiatrist, but it is conditioned on her continued use of “the 
supports provided to her.” The government psychologist’s prognosis is much more 
guarded. Nevertheless, I conclude this mitigating condition is applicable. 
 
9 
 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a relatively young woman who has spent about half her life dealing 
with her mental health issues. She has cooperated with and responded to treatment and 
medication, but she remains very fragile. The two episodes occurring in mid-June and 
early July demonstrate how easily a drastic mood swing can be triggered. When she is 
symptomatic or stops taking her medications, her insight and judgment are impaired. 
 
 Applicant has reacted to her mood swings in self-destructive ways. As noted by 
the government psychologist, her actions are not directed at other persons or her 
workplace. She responds to stress with sadness, crying, and self-destructive behavior. 
Nevertheless, her fragility makes her very vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress. Her condition is chronic and can be expected to persist, albeit in a somewhat 
controlled manner, for the foreseeable future. There is a significant likelihood of 
recurring unhealthy behavior triggered by unexpected stressors. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline I, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on psychological conditions. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I (Psychological Conditions): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
