This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-08836
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge:
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns that arise from his failure to
file state and federal income tax returns and pay taxes that remain owing.  
On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted an answer to the SOR that was received by DOHA on April 28, 2008, in which
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
he admitted all SOR allegations, denied they created a security concern, and requested
a clearance decision based on the written record without a hearing.  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 12, 2008,
that was mailed to Applicant on May 14, 2008. Applicant was informed he had 30 days
from receipt of the FORM to submit his objections thereto or any additional information he
wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on May 25, 2008. He
timely submitted one document in response to the FORM that was forwarded to
Department Counsel on July 1, 2008. Department Counsel indicated she did not object to
Applicant’s submission and the case was then assigned to me on July 8, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 68-year-old man who has been employed as a consultant by a
defense contractor since November 2001. The security clearance application contained
in the FORM indicates Applicant was employed by a government agency from April 1961
until his retirement therefrom in June 2001. He worked in various positions and at several
locations throughout the United States for that government agency. His last position with
the agency was as a program analyst from June 1988 to June 2001.
Applicant has been married three times. His first marriage lasted  from June 1960
until December 1982. The second marriage lasted from July 1984 until April 2000. These
two marriages ended by divorce. Applicant has been married to his current wife since
January 2001. He has three adult children.
Applicant moved to his current state of residence in January 2000. He lived in his
prior state of residence from February 1987 until January 2000. Applicant failed to file an
income tax return in his former state of residence for the last year (1999) he resided there.
He also failed file tax returns in his current state of residence from 2000 to 2006. There is
no indication in the FORM Applicant has yet filed an income tax return or paid any taxes
that may or may not be due in his former state of residence for the year 1999.   
Interrogatories were sent to Applicant by DOHA inquiring about the status of the
alleged unpaid state income taxes in or about October 2007. Applicant responded to the
interrogatories and admitted he had not filed state income tax returns for the years in
question. Thereafter, he filed the income tax returns for the missing years in his current
state of residence. In December 2007 and February 2008, he paid the state $40,710 in
past due taxes and $4,266.73 in penalties and interest. There remained a balance due for
penalties and interest of $15,943.44. Applicant entered into an installment agreement with
the state whereby he is to pay $664.31 per month for 24 months to liquidate the past due
interest and penalties. He made payments of $700 in March and April in accord with the
agreement.
Applicant also did not file federal income tax returns for the years 2002, 2004 and
2005 until after he received DOHA’s interrogatories. In response to the interrogatories,
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
3
Applicant stated he filed the delinquent federal income tax returns in October 2007, and
owed the IRS $129,849 in back taxes, including penalties and interest. In his answer to the
SOR, he indicated he had entered into a tentative installment agreement with the IRS to
satisfy the delinquent taxes. He included a copy of a check, dated April 16, 2008, payable
to the U.S. Treasury in the amount of $2,700 which indicates it is a payment on the
tentative installment agreement.   
Applicant obtained the funds to pay the delinquent state taxes from IRA and TSP
withdrawals, profits from the sale of two houses, pension funds, and his income. In  h is
response to the FORM, Applicant indicated he was continuing to make the required
payments under the installment plans he has entered into.
In his response to the interrogatories, Applicant attributed his failure to file state and
federal income tax returns and pay the taxes owed to expenses related to relocating to his
current state of residence in 1999/2000, records being difficult to locate because of that
move, his last divorce and remarriage, and the deaths of his ex-wife, his mother, and other
unidentified relatives. He did not further elaborate on how locating records affected his
ability to file income tax returns for the years after he moved or how the other cited events
affected his ability to either file income tax returns or pay taxes as they became due.
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon
the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the
factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence
of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations), with its respective DC and MC, is most relevant in this case.   
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence ,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to10
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant failed to file state and federal income tax returns or pay taxes that he
owed for many years. As a result, he owed approximately $190,000 in delinquent state and
Federal income taxes at the time he received interrogatories from DOHA. Shortly
thereafter, he filed the delinquent returns and paid about $50,000 toward the taxes, interest
and penalties he owed. He obtained the funds to make those payments by selling real
estate he owned and withdrawing funds from retirement accounts. Accepting his claim in
his response to the FORM that he has continued to make the required payments on the
installment agreements he has entered into, Applicant may have paid about an additional
$12,000 since the SOR was filed. Thus, he still owes somewhere in the vicinity of $125,000
for past due taxes, interests and penalties.
  
5
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; DC
19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and DC 19(g): failure to file annual
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same
apply. 
Applicant provided only vague explanations for his failure to file the required state
and federal income tax returns or pay the taxes that he owed. He provided no reason to
conclude that he lacked the ability to either file the returns or pay the taxes because of any
circumstance that was beyond his ability to control. Thus, Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(b):
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances does not apply. 
Applicant did promptly file the delinquent income tax returns, pay the amounts he
could, and enter into repayment agreements for the balances owing once he received the
interrogatories from DOHA. However, it is noteworthy that he submitted an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in September 2006, disclosed therein
that he owed delinquent state and federal income taxes, and wrote: 
I have delinquent Federal and State Income Taxes due to not filing and
paying. I am currently in contact with the Internal Revenue Service on these
issues. I am in the process of preparing my past Federal and State Income
Tax returns. I hope to have all my returns filed soon. The income taxes,
penalties, and interest will be paid from current resources to the extent
possible and installments if necessary. (Item 4, Section 28)
Despite these assertions Applicant made in the e-QIP, there is nothing in the FORM that
indicates he took any action to file the delinquent returns or pay the past due taxes until
after he received the interrogatories from DOHA and was, thereby, made aware of the
potential impact these matters might have on him retaining a security clearance. The
payments having apparently only been made under this duress, I conclude MC 20(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts
does not apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of this
case. 
The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the
security concerns caused by the financial considerations that are present in this case. He
6
has not overcome the case against him nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It
is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
_________________
HENRY LAZZARO
Administrative Judge
7
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
