1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11593
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline C (Foreign Preference)
and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Statement of the Case
 Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-QIP), on January 25,
2007. On March 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guidelines C and B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 3, 2008 and requested a hearing
before an administrative judge. In his answer he denied the one allegation under
Guideline C (SOR ¶ 1.a.),and denied the seven allegations in the SOR under Guideline
B (SOR ¶¶ 2. a.-g.). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 12, 2008. I
received the case assignment on June 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
June 20, 2008, for a hearing on July 25, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered four exhibits (Exhs 1-4) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted four exhibits (Exhs. A-D)
which were admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 24, 2008. The record was left open for ten
days and one additional document was submitted by Applicant and admitted into
evidence without objection (Exh. E). 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old civil engineer who works for an engineering services
company that provides services for the U.S. government. He was born in the Philippines
and emigrated to the U.S. to complete his education. He became a citizen in 2006. He
received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the Philippines and received a PhD in
the U.S. from one of the leading engineering schools. 
Applicant’s principal activity in his work is geo-structural engineering and his work
has involved the central artery (Big Dig) in Boston and research on tunnels in the Alps.
He does not hold a security clearance and now works on civilian construction projects
for his employer. His company has worked for the U.S. government, and they desire to
use him on those projects which require a clearance. He is motivated to work on
government projects because of his pride in his U.S. citizenship. 
Before becoming a citizen he held a passport of the Philippines which did not
expire until March 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a.). He has destroyed the passport (Attachment to
Answer) and does not intend to apply for a new one. 
Applicant has one brother who is a citizen of and resides in the Philippines. He
has two sisters who are also Philippine citizens. One sister resides in Norway and the
other one lived in the U.S. until 2007 and then returned to the Philippines. His mother-
in-law is also a citizen of the Philippines but resides in the U.S. (SOR ¶¶ 2.b.-d.). He
and his siblings have a joint interest in a family home in the Philippines valued at
approximately $250,000 (SOR ¶ 2.e.).
Applicant helped organize and design a plant for a company his wife and her
brother now own. Applicant organized the company in 2002 with some university
classmates to manufacture an environmental product for use in water and air
purification. In August 2006 he sold his interest in the company to his wife (SOR ¶ 2.g.).
He traveled to the Philippines in 2001, 2005, and 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.f.) primarily in
connection with planning and construction of the plant which was completed in 2006. 
3
It is this allegation in the SOR relating to the company that the government
expressed the most concern about in the hearing since there was a possibility that
Applicant’s activities for the foreign company and his relatives continued interest in it
could create conflicts with the work he does for his employer in the U.S. The other
allegations under Guideline B were alleged to show a context for this allegation since it
involves a company in his country of origin (Tr. 7-8). His immediate supervisor, who is a
top company officer, knows of his past involvement with the company and his wife and
brother-in-law’s continuing interest in it. The supervisory corporate officer concluded
that there is no likelihood of overlap or conflict between the work of his employer and
the Philippine company (Exh. E). From my analysis of the descriptive information
submitted by Applicant (Tr. 63-65) and the corporate officer about both companies, I
agree with the conclusion. 
Applicant has significant financial interests in the U.S. primarily in two homes in
two states valued respectively at $400,000 and $200,000. He also owns a rental
property valued at $150,000. He has a savings account of over $10,000. His annual
salary is $118,000. His wife works for a non-profit agency concerned with juveniles and
is paid $40,000 per annum. They have two children ages 17 and 11. He is highly
regarded by the officers of his company for his abilities, integrity, and competence
(Exhs. A-C).
The government did not offer any documents for administrative notice in
Applicant’s hearing, relating to the Philippines, the country at issue, as is often done in
cases involving either of the foreign guidelines (B and C). However, I take notice of the
fact that it is well known that the Philippines has a democratically elected government
and is a staunch ally of the United states. Historically, it was ceded to the U.S. after the
Spanish American War in 1898 and became independent in 1946 after its occupation by
the Japanese in World War II. It has a history of support of U.S. interests in the Pacific
area, and as an ally of the U.S. in various conflicts in the Far East. It has taken action
against Muslim extremists on the southern island of Mindanao with the assistance of the
U.S. military. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate
legal precepts, factors and conditions above, I conclude the following with respect to all
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in
AG ¶ 9: 
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
5
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to possession of a current foreign
passport;
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns including that the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated. While he had a passport, it was acquired before he became a citizen and it
has been destroyed. I conclude that the security concern has been mitigated. 
         Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate
legal precepts, factors and conditions above, I conclude the following with respect to the
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG
¶ 6: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism
Conditions under Guideline B that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying include contact with a foreign family member who is a citizen of, or resident in
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion (AG ¶ 7a). A second condition that could
raise a security concern include a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a
.....foreign owned or operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened
risk of foreign influence or exploitation (AG ¶ 7e). 
Based on the evidence of record, including Applicant’s acknowledgment of family
members living abroad and his past work for a foreign company in which his wife and
brother-in-law have a financial interest, the Government established a basis for a security
concern over foreign influence. The Applicant had the burden to establish security
suitability through evidence which refutes, mitigates, or extenuates the disqualification
6
and demonstrates that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security
clearance. ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
Mitigating conditions (MC) that might be applicable are a determination that the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which the persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual group or government and the interests of the U.S. (AG ¶
8a).
Applicant’s relatives are from a country with long and solid ties to the U.S. with
shared and common interests. His two siblings living in the Philippines present minimum
security concerns that are not of serious concern because of the nature of the
government of the Philippines and its historical connections with the U.S. The foreign
company is now owned by his wife and brother-in-law and he has no continuing
involvement with it. The business is not similar to, or in any way in conflict with the
services his employer provides. This has been confirmed by a senior officer of the
company. I conclude that the allegations of foreign influence have been mitigated. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the potentially
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances
surrounding this case. The security concerns do not arise because of any misconduct by
Applicant, but because family members have a financial interest in a foreign company and
two others are citizens of and live in a foreign country which is the country of origin of
Applicant. The above cited factors are not precisely relevant to this type of case. Of
relevance is his expressed strong feeling concerning his identity as an American citizen
and where his loyalty and obligations belong. He is a well-motivated and well-educated
7
professional with strong ties to the United States (Tr. 69-70). I find his testimony credible.
There is no basis for denial of access to classified information.
        Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from the allegations of foreign
preference and foreign influence.
             Formal Findings
       Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
         Paragraph 1, Guideline C FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
   Paragraph 2, Guideline B  FOR APPLICANT 
           Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is granted. 
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
