                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                             ) ISCR Case No. 07-16563 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on January 14, 2007.  On April 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant detailing security 
concerns for alcohol consumption and personal conduct under Guidelines G and E.  
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 16, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 17, 2008.  Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations under Guideline G concerning driving while intoxicated offenses and 
alcohol counseling.  He denied that he continues to consume alcohol.  He also denied 
falsification of his security clearance application by failing to list all of his driving while 
intoxicated offenses.  He requested a hearing before an administrative judge and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 31, 2008.  The case was 
assigned to me on August 4, 2008, and DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 13, 
2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 9, 2008.  The government 
offered two exhibits, marked Gov. Ex. 1-2, which were received without objection.  
Applicant submitted 2 exhibits, marked App. Ex. A-B, which were received without 
objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 18, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and has been a program manager or deputy program 
manager for a defense contractor for over three years.  He is a college graduate with a 
master's degree in computer science.  He is married with three children.  He previously 
received clearance for a position of public trust.  However, he has not previously applied 
for or been granted access to classified information (Tr. 32-36; Gov. Ex. I, e-QIP, dated 
February 13, 2007; See, App. Ex. A, Family picture, undated).   
 
Applicant admitted he was arrested, charged, and convicted of driving under the 
influence of alcohol in January 1984, January 1985, November 1986, January 1987, 
October 1989, August 1990, January 1991, and March 1991 (SOR 1. a-h).  Applicant 
admitted to continuing to drink alcohol between 1991 and 2002.  Applicant admitted he 
was arrested, charged with, and convicted of driving while intoxicated in March 2002, 
and May 2002 (SOR 1. i-j).  Applicant admitted that as a result of these offenses, he 
was directed to attend alcohol counseling (SOR 1.k).  He completed alcohol counseling 
in July 2002 (Tr. 14-16, 38-40, Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated Jun 8, 2008, at 190-
194, 197-203, See, Response to SOR, dated April 17, 2008). 
 
The eight driving while intoxicated offenses happened when Applicant was a 
college student in his 20s.  He wishes that the authorities had punished him more 
severely so that he would have stopped drinking (Tr. 14-16).  After 1991, Applicant did 
not stop drinking alcohol but curtailed his alcohol consumption extensively.  He only 
drank occasionally with family or at family events, usually once a year at social events 
or on a holiday.  He married in 1991, changed his lifestyle, and started to live differently.  
He attended church regularly.  Alcohol consumption was no longer a part of his lifestyle 
but he had not yet made a commitment to stop drinking alcohol.  In 1991, he would not 
have considered that he had an alcohol problem, but he now realizes he has an alcohol 
problem (Tr. 14-16, 39-40, 43-44, 70-71). 
 
In March 2002 and again in May 2002 when he was 39 years old and on a 
business trip for his employer, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated.  He 
knew it was wrong to drink and drive.  The only time he did drink and drive was on the 
two business trips.  He was convicted, and sentenced each time for driving under the 
influence of alcohol.  He should have decided before these incidents to not drink alcohol 
but he did continue to drink occasionally.  He did not see the fault in drinking alcohol, so 
he drank on occasion with clients.  His continued drinking clouded his judgment and put 
 
3 
 
 
him in a situation where he drank and drove.  He knows now that he should not have 
been drinking alcohol at all.  As an adult, he should not let drinking cloud his judgment 
and then get behind the wheel of a car.  In 2002, he would have stated that he had a 
drinking problem.  He stated that he was not regularly binge drinking but he did have 
two binge drinking episodes (Tr. 40-46, 70-71).   
 
As a result of the May 2002 incident, Applicant was required to attend an alcohol 
and driving counseling program.  Applicant attended and completed the program as 
required.  Applicant continues to see his counselor but not on a routine scheduled 
permanent basis.  He sees his counselor only when he thinks he wants to discuss 
issues with her.  As a result of this counseling, Applicant realized that he needed to stop 
drinking alcohol.  The counselor told him to stop drinking but he did not completely 
agree with her suggestion.  He continued to drink moderately, but never drank to 
excess.  At most, he consumed about one drink any time he drank alcohol (Tr. 70-75). 
 
In June 2007, he was severely injured in an automobile accident when he was hit 
from the rear.  Applicant decided that he no longer could drink alcohol because of his 
injuries and the realization what his family and life meant to him.  Alcohol consumption 
no longer suited him.  He had a nice family, was active in his church, and was receiving 
new and higher jobs and responsibility from his employer.  The alcohol counseling, his 
church pastor, and church members were instrumental in helping him stop drinking.  His 
last drink of alcohol was in June 2007.  He does not drink alcohol now.  He was not told 
by the doctors after his accident not to drink alcohol, but he realizes he can no longer 
drink alcohol.  In response to interrogatories in January 2008, Applicant noted he 
currently drank about two drinks once every two or three months. He stated he was 
referring to what he may drink in the future and not to the alcohol he was then 
consuming.  Applicant noted that he drank alcohol in 2002 not as a result of his travels 
but because he would drink on special occasions and had not yet decided not to drink 
alcohol.  His current position with his employer requires him to travel.  His wife will 
accompany him on some of the trips since he needs help managing his baggage 
because of his automobile accident injuries.  He stated that he will not drink alcohol to 
excess in the future based on his changed lifestyle, his work with his family and church, 
and the people around him understanding that he does not drink (Tr. 17-24, 49-52, 61-
69, 75-80; See, Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated June 8, 2008 at 182-189).   
 
In answering question 23(d) on the security clearance application concerning any 
arrest for drug or alcohol-related incidents, Applicant state he did not list his driving 
while intoxicated offense from 1984 until 1991 because he thought he only had to go 
back seven years.  He had experience completing the SF 85P which has a time limit of 
seven years.  He did not carefully read the questionnaire and limited his response to the 
last seven years.  He did list his 2002 driving while intoxicated arrests and convictions 
and his 2002 alcohol-related counseling.  He did not remember all of his convictions in 
the 1980s but he would have remembered some of them.  Applicant stated that the 
driving while intoxicated offenses in the 1980s coupled with the 2002 offenses may 
indicate to security officials that he had an alcohol problem.  However, he believes the 
older offenses would not be an issue in granting him an interim security clearance 
 
4 
 
 
because the offenses were so old and would not change the outcome of his being 
granted an interim clearance or a final clearance.  His failure to list the offenses would 
not have been a factor in his interim clearance (Tr. 53-60). 
 
His pastor noted that Applicant has been a key member of the church for over 15 
years and instrumental in their fund raising efforts.  Applicant served in various 
leadership positions and meets with local officials in support of the church's programs.  
He is a Sunday school teacher and takes part in other spiritual aspects of the church 
programs.  He has shown consistency, reliability, leadership, ethical conduct, and 
loyalty (App. Ex. B, Letter, dated May 23, 2008).   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)   
 
Applicant’s driving while intoxicated arrests and convictions from 1984 until 1991 
and in 2002 raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions (AC DC) AG ¶ 22(a) 
(alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the influence, fighting, 
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent), and AC 
DC ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent).  The driving while intoxicated incidents are alcohol-related incidents away 
from work.  Eight driving while intoxicated offenses in seven years (1984-1991) and two 
driving while intoxicated arrests and convictions within two months in 2002 are 
indications of binge or habitual consumption of alcohol.  
  
SOR (allegation 1.l.) states that Applicant continued to consume alcohol after his 
arrests and counseling for alcohol.  Applicant admitted to consuming alcohol after his 
arrest and counseling but that he stopped drinking alcohol in June 2007.  There is no 
indication of consumption of alcohol after June 2007, so the allegation is correct only 
until June 2007.   
 
 Since Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the government produced 
substantial evidence by way of exhibits to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 
22(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15).  An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government (See, ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)). 
 
 Applicant has raised by his testimony Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions 
(AC MC) AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AC MC 
AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
 
6 
 
 
alcohol abuser); and AC MC AG ¶ 23(d) (the individual has successfully completed 
inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in meetings of 
Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis 
by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized treatment program).   
 
 There were eight incidents of driving while intoxicated from 1984 until 1991.  
There was a period of eleven years before the next series of driving while intoxicated 
incidents.  During those eleven years, Applicant continued to drink alcohol but at a 
reduced level.  In 2002, there were two incidents of driving while intoxicated in less than 
two months.  Thereafter, Applicant continued to consume alcohol although again at a 
reduced level until June 2007 when he completely stopped consuming alcohol.  While 
there has not been an alcohol-related incident since 2002, Applicant drank alcohol from 
1984 until 2007, a period of 23 years.  He stopped consuming alcohol only a year ago.  
There has not been sufficient time of no alcohol consumption compared to the years 
that he did consume alcohol.  The alcohol-related incidents are frequent since there 
were ten driving while intoxicated offenses.  The early incidents happened when 
Applicant was young and in his 20s and the later incidents happened when Applicant 
was on business trips.  None of these incidents happened under unusual 
circumstances.  They took place under normal and standard living circumstances for a 
person attending school or working.  
 
 Applicant does acknowledge that he should not drink alcohol.  He also attended 
and completed alcohol-related counseling, and has seen his counselor but not in a 
recurring standard scheduled program.  Applicant's information concerning actions 
taken to overcome his problem or to establish a clear pattern of modified consumption is 
limited to Applicant's own statements that he no longer consumes alcohol.  This is not 
sufficient to show that he has taken clear and effective steps to overcome his alcohol-
related problems.  There was eleven years between alcohol-elated incidents and 
Applicant continued to drink during that time.  It has been six years since his last 
incident but only one year since he stopped drinking alcohol.  Applicant has not 
presented sufficient information show that alcohol-related incidents will not recur.  He 
has not mitigated security concerns for alcohol consumption.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.   
 
7 
 
 
 The security clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and 
accurate information.  If a person conceals or provides false information, the security 
clearance process cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified 
information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant's failure to 
list his eight driving while intoxicated offenses from 1984 until 1991 on his security 
clearance application raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibility).   
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  While there is a security concern for an 
omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral 
statement to the government when applying for a security clearance, not every 
omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is a falsification.  A falsification must be 
deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  Applicant did 
not list the 1984 to 1991 driving while intoxicated offenses because he believed he only 
had to list offense that took place in the last seven years.  He completed applications for 
public trust positions in the past and the questions on those applications concerning 
police record are limited by the seven year time frame.  However, there are six 
questions on the e-QIP security clearance application concerning an applicant's police 
record.  The first four, to include alcohol-related charges and conviction, are not limited 
by times.  Only the last two, concerning military convictions and any other convictions or 
criminal matters not mentioned in the previous questions, are limited by time.  The 
question concerning alcohol incidents clearly state an applicant should list any arrests 
or convictions that are alcohol-related.  A reasonable and educated person like 
Applicant with a Master's degree would know that the alcohol-related question is not 
limited by time.  A person with eight driving while intoxicated offenses in his past more 
reasonably would not want that information revealed when applying for access to 
classified information.  I find that Applicant deliberately did not list his 1984-1991 
alcohol-related charges and convictions on his security clearance application.   
 
 I considered all of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and determine none apply.  Applicant never made a good faith effort to correct 
erroneous or inaccurate information.  While Applicant eventually admitted the alcohol-
related offenses, it was in response to question from security investigators and not on 
his own initiative (See, Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated June 8, 2008).   
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating 
Applicant’s security worthiness.  I have considered Applicant's service to his community 
and his church.  I considered that he is regarded as honest and trustworthy and an 
excellent employee.  However, Applicant had ten alcohol-related incidents and received 
counseling for alcohol consumption.  He only stopped using alcohol, by his own 
admission, last year.  He deliberately did not provide full information about his alcohol-
related arrests on his security clearance application and did not reveal his early alcohol-
related arrests or convictions until questioned by security investigators.  Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to show that his consumption of alcohol is not of 
security concern.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
that Applicant will not consume alcohol to excess in the future.  I have doubts about his 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance because he did not provide complete 
and full information on his security clearance application.  For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption and personal conduct.  I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are; 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
DECISION 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant a security clearance for Applicant.  
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Thomas M. Crean 
Administrative Judge 
