 
 
1 
 
 
     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
            
        
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-11728 
 SSN:                                                   )                                
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference.   His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF-86) on June 29, 2006. On April 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  
 On May 1, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that his 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 23, 2008. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5.  Additionally, the Government submitted with the FORM 
official U.S. government publications containing facts about Jordan and Israel. The 
Government requested that I take administrative notice of those facts in my decision in 
this case. I marked the Government summary and accompanying documents as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. By letter dated June 25, 2008, a copy of the FORM, including 
the documents offered for administrative notice, was forwarded to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt.  Applicant was provided with a complete copy of the FORM; he received the file 
on June 30, 2008.  His response was due on July 30, 2008.  He failed to submit any 
information within the required time period. On September 15, 2008, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations which raise security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and two allegations which raise security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. Applicant admitted all SOR allegations under 
Guidelines B and C.  His admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.    
 
 Applicant was born in the U.S. and is a U.S. citizen. He also claims dual 
citizenship with Jordan. He is unmarried and employed as an auditor by a government 
contractor.  He seeks a security clearance.  (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant resided in Israel from at least 1995 through August 2001.   From 1998 
to 2001 he attended a high school in Israel, from which he graduated in 2001. He 
earned a degree in accounting from a U.S. university in 2005.  (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents and sister are dual citizens of the U.S. and Jordan.  They 
reside in Israel.  Applicant’s father is an officer in a family business located in part in 
Israel.  His mother is employed as a secretary by the family business. Applicant’s sister 
is a student at a university in Israel.  About once a month, Applicant has contact with his 
parents and sister by telephone. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s maternal grandfather is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Jordan and 
resides in Israel, where he owns a business. Applicant’s maternal grandmother is a 
citizen of Jordan and also resides in Israel.  She is employed in her husband’s business.  
Applicant has contact with his maternal grandparents about once a year by telephone.  
(Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant has four uncles.  One of Applicant’s uncles is a dual citizen of the U.S. 
and Jordan and resides in Jordan. The uncle is the president of the family business 
 
 
3 
 
 
which employs Applicant’s father and mother. Applicant has contact with his uncle in 
Jordan twice a year by telephone. (Item 5.) 
 
 Three of Applicant’s uncles are dual citizens of the U.S. and Jordan and reside in 
the U.S. Two of the uncles own a U.S. business together. From April 2004 to June 
2006, Applicant was employed by these two uncles in their business. The third uncle is 
employed by a U.S. university.  Applicant has contact with his three uncles who reside 
in the U.S. about three to four times per week.  (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother and his paternal grandmother are also dual citizens of the 
U.S. and Jordan. They reside in the U.S.  Applicant’s brother is employed as an 
information technology consultant by a U.S. business. His paternal grandmother is 
unemployed. Applicant has daily contact with his brother and paternal grandmother.  
(Item 5.)   
 
 Applicant does not own property in Jordan, Israel, or any other foreign country.  
He does not possess any foreign bank accounts.  He does not have any foreign 
business or financial interests.  He does not receive support from his foreign national 
relatives.  (Item 5.)    
 
 Applicant was issued a U.S. passport on November 2, 2000.  He maintains and 
uses a Jordanian passport when he travels to Jordan. He was issued a Jordanian 
passport in May 2004.   His Jordanian passport will expire in April 2009.  (Item 5.) 
 
 While he considers himself to be a loyal U.S. citizen, Applicant exercises dual 
citizenship with Jordan and is unwilling to renounce his Jordanian citizenship. He 
maintains Jordanian citizenship because he expects someday to inherit property in 
Jordan, and Jordanian citizenship is a condition for eligibility to inherit property in that 
country.  (Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Jordan and Israel in June 2002, December 2002, June 
2003, and March 2006.  He traveled to Jordan in August 2002 and December 2003.  
(Item 3; Item 5.)     
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts offered by the Government and 
derived from official U.S. publications: 
 
 Jordan, a constitutional monarchy located in the Middle East, carries out a pro-
Western foreign policy that is helpful to the U.S.  Jordan’s human rights practices, on 
the other hand, include torture, arbitrary arrest, denial of due process, and restrictions 
on freedom of speech, assembly, press, association, and movement. (HE 1: Summary) 
 
 Jordanian law applies to dual Jordanian-American citizens, and dual citizens are 
treated as Jordanian citizens under the law. Jordan subjects male dual citizens under 
the age of 37 to mandatory military service. (HE1: Summary) 
 
 
4 
 
 
   Even though Jordan has aggressively pursued terrorists, the threat of terrorism 
carried out by transnational and local terrorist groups remains high in Jordan. These 
terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities, including human espionage and 
other means, to exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. In recent years, 
numerous terrorist plots against U.S. interests have been interrupted by Jordanian 
security forces. In November 2006, Jordanian officials intercepted a plot to assassinate 
President Bush when he visited Jordan.  (HE 1: Summary) 
 
 Israel, Jordan’s neighbor in the Middle East, is a parliamentary democracy.  The 
U.S. is Israel’s largest trading partner. Israel and the U.S. have a close relationship 
based on common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests.  Even 
so, the U.S. has concerns with some of Israel’s policies, specifically Israel’s sale of 
military goods to China, Israel’s inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property, and 
certain cases of espionage involving compromise of proprietary or classified information 
with military applications.  (HE 1: Summary.) 
 
 Israel is an active collector of U.S. proprietary information and targets private 
industry and U.S. Government organizations.  (HE 1: Summary) 
 
 There is a continuing threat of terrorist attacks in Israel.  The U.S. Government 
has urged Americans traveling in Israel to exercise a high degree of care when visiting 
places associated with U.S. interests or located near official U.S. buildings.  (HE 1: 
Summary)      
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
 
5 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 7(a), AG ¶ 7(b), and AG ¶ 7(i).1  
 
 United States interests are targeted by transnational and local terrorists operating 
in Jordan and Israel.  American citizens with immediate family members who are 
citizens or residents of Jordan or Israel could be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or 
pressure. They could also be pressured by individuals or groups in Israel or Jordan 
seeking sensitive information or technology held by or developed by U.S. government 
contractors. 
 
 Applicant, a dual citizen of the U.S. and Jordan, resided in Israel during his 
adolescent years.  He attended high school in Israel. His father, mother, and sister are 
dual citizens of the U.S. and Jordan.  They currently reside in Israel, where the father 
and mother work in a family business and the sister is a student at an Israeli university.  
Applicant’s maternal grandfather is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Jordan and resides in 
Israel with Applicant’s material grandmother, who is a citizen of Jordan. Applicant’s 
maternal grandfather and grandmother carry out a separate business in Israel.  One of 
Applicant’s four uncles is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Jordan and resides in Jordan. 
He is the president of the business that employs Applicant’s father and mother in Israel. 
Applicant’s contacts with family members residing and operating businesses in Jordan 
and Israel are multiple and diverse.  These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7 
(a) and 7(b).  
 
 In addition, Applicant has close relations and frequent contact with his brother, 
paternal grandmother, and three uncles, all of whom are dual citizens of the U.S. and 
Jordan and reside in the U.S. Applicant and his brother, who represent the third 
generation of the extended family, are both employed by U.S. businesses, the brother 
as an information technology consultant and Applicant as an auditor.  These facts also 
raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). 
 
 Applicant maintains an active Jordanian passport. In June 2002, June 2003, 
June 2003, and March 2006, Applicant traveled to Jordan and Israel.  He made 
separate trips to Jordan in August 2002 and December 2003.  He uses his Jordanian 
passport when traveling to Jordan.  This raises a security concern under AG ¶ 7(i) 
because, as a U.S. citizen, Applicant’s reliance upon his Jordanian citizenship in these 
 
1 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 7(i) reads: “conduct, especially 
while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by a foreign group, government, or country.” 
 
 
7 
 
 
circumstances could make him vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign group, government, or country. 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  If Applicant’s “foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. 
Government business or approved by the cognizant security authority,” then AG ¶ 8(d) 
might apply. 
  
Applicant’s relationships with his parents, siblings, grandparents, and uncles are 
neither casual nor infrequent. Instead, Applicant’s relationships are based on long-
standing family ties of affection and obligation. Applicant is a dutiful son, brother, 
grandson and nephew to relatives who are dual citizens of the U.S and Jordan who 
reside and conduct business in Jordan and Israel. Because transnational terrorism is a 
serious concern in those countries, and because there are also interests who may be 
seeking classified or protected information, Applicant’s close relationships with family 
members in Jordan and Israel raise a heightened risk that he could be pressured to 
choose between the interests of the foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the U.S.   
 
Applicant maintains dual citizenship with Jordan so that he can be eligible to 
inherit property in Jordan in the future. This interest creates a conflict of interest in favor 
of Jordan. Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence to corroborate that he 
would resolve any security-related conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.  Applicant’s 
relationships with his family members who are dual citizens of the U.S. and Jordan and 
who reside in Jordan and Israel could force him to choose between loyalty to his family 
and the security interests of the United States.  (ISCR Case No. 03-15485, at 4-6 (App. 
Bd. June 2, 2005)   
 
Applicant’s use of his Jordanian passport to enter Jordan could make him 
vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign group, government, or 
country.  He failed to provide documentation to show that he used his foreign passport 
while on official U.S. government business or that his use of a foreign passport was 
approved by his cognizant security authority.  I conclude that the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(d) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. He expects to inherit property in Jordan at 
some time in the future. As an adult, he actively sought dual citizenship with Jordan and 
a Jordanian passport.  He did this in order to assert and maintain Jordanian citizenship 
so that he might comply with the inheritance laws of Jordan.  Additionally, he used his 
Jordanian passport to enter Jordan. He refuses to renounce his Jordanian citizenship. 
These actions show an allegiance to a country other than the U.S. 
 
I have carefully reviewed the facts of Applicant’s case and the Foreign 
Preference AG. I conclude that Applicant’s conduct raises potentially disqualifying 
security concerns under AG ¶10 (a)(1), ¶10(a)(5), and AG ¶10 (b). 
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if it is based solely on an 
applicant’s parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.  Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.  Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.  Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were approved by his 
cognizant security authority.  Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign passport 
might be mitigated if he presented credible evidence that the passport had been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
I conclude that none of the Guideline C mitigating conditions applies to the facts 
of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a dual citizen of the U.S. 
and Jordan. He has multiple family connections with persons living in Israel and Jordan.  
These family members are conducting business in those countries, where credible 
threats of transnational and local terrorism exist amid efforts by individuals, groups, and 
governments to obtain U.S. protected and proprietary information. These relationships 
could cause Applicant to be manipulated in a way to compromise U.S. security 
interests. Additionally, Applicant, who is a native-born U.S. citizen, has actively sought 
Jordanian citizenship and a Jordanian passport to protect an expected inheritance 
available to him only if he is a Jordanian citizen.  His actions reveal a serious conflict of 
interest which he cannot be expected to resolve in favor of the U.S.    
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate foreign influence and foreign preference 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h: Against Applicant 
 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant 
   
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                             
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
