 
 
 
 
1
                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-16363 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen Smith, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On March 8, 2007, Applicant submitted a Standard Form 86 Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86). On March 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 15, 2008, and requested a 
hearing. DOHA initially assigned the case to another administrative judge and 
 
 
 
 
2
reassigned it to me on July 2, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 15, 2008, 
and the case was heard on July 29, 2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. At the 
conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until August 14, 2008, to give Applicant 
an opportunity to submit information. On August 19, 2008, Applicant submitted four 
exhibits that I marked as AE A through D, and admitted into the record without objection 
by the Government. DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 15, 2008.                                     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three factual allegations 
contained in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old and married. He has three children, ages 21, 18 and 11. 
He has a Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration and has been a Certified Public 
Accountant since 1981.  
 
 From June 1981 to January 2000, Applicant was a partner in an accounting firm.  
He left the partnership to begin making arrangements to purchase a steel company that 
had three separate locations. In July 2000, he acquired the company, after obtaining a 
$5 million dollar loan from a bank that he secured with company assets and his 
personal guarantee. (Tr. 14). In August or September 2000, a recession started in the 
steel industry. By mid-2002, economic conditions had continued to spiral downward, 
and Applicant realized his company was undercapitalized. He then negotiated a 
$400,000 loan with a state economic development group. The economy did not improve 
and in December 2003, Applicant and the bank decided the business was no longer 
viable. (Tr. 17). 
 
  By that time, Applicant had reduced the $5 million dollar loan to $3.1 million. 
After discussing the situation with the bank, Applicant agreed to liquidate the company’s 
assets and avoid a corporate or personal bankruptcy. (Tr. 17). He received $750,000 
from the sale of the assets and used it to reduce the loan to $2,450,000. In addition, he 
gave the bank 80% of the equity in his home and the bank wrote-off the remainder of 
the loan. (Tr. 19). In order to resolve the other outstanding loan, he withdrew $90,000 
from his 401(k) and obtained a $40,000 loan from a friend. He paid the economic 
development group $40,000 and used $90,000 for additional payments to the bank and 
to resolve $40,000-$42,000 in credit card debt with seven or eight companies. (Tr. 19; 
22).   
 
 Applicant hired a lawyer to negotiate a resolution with the bank and the 
unsecured creditors. He asked his lawyer to contact all of the credit card companies and 
negotiate a settlement. (Tr. 21). After notifying all of the insecured creditors of 
Applicant’s interest in settling the debts, his lawyer resolved all of them in 2005, for 
approximately 10-15% of the final balance, except for the three credit card companies 
 
 
 
 
3
listed in the SOR. These are the only debts from the failed business that remain 
unresolved. (Tr. 66; 74). 
 
 As of December 27, 2007, the three debts alleged in the SOR, now total $42,000, 
and include substantial finance charges and fees.1 Since communicating with the three 
creditors between 2004 and 2005, neither Applicant nor his lawyer ever received any 
communication from the creditors, until ten days ago when Applicant received 
correspondence from the creditor listed in ¶ 1.a, who now asserts a $26,000 debt. (Tr. 
22; 59; GE 3). He did not pursue the creditors over the past two years because they 
never responded to his attorney’s previous communications, and he did not have 
sufficient funds to pay them. (Tr. 67). After receiving the SOR in early April 2008, he 
discussed resolution of the debts with his counsel, but they decided not to re-contact the 
creditors because of Applicant’ cash flow problems. (Tr. 67). He believes he could 
resolve the debts for about $8,000 to $10,000. (Tr. 34). He intends to do so in the future 
and will borrow money from his family, if necessary. (Tr. 67). Prior to this situation, he 
never experienced financial difficulties. (Tr. 67). He does not anticipate starting any 
business in the future.  
  
 Applicant spent approximately $250,000 of his personal funds to resolve his 
loans, rather than filing for bankruptcy. He felt “like it was better to continue to work with 
all the unsecured creditors the best I had and took all the cash and equity that we had 
available and worked out settlements with everyone that we could that was willing to 
work [sic].” (Tr.20).  He further elaborated that “I voluntarily took those assets out of the 
401(k) and gave up future earnings and future security so that I could settle, come to 
grips with this financial disaster that we had as a result of the business closing.” (Tr. 26). 
 
 After he completed the dissolution of the company in June 2005, Applicant 
became the president of an international investment company. In November 2006, he 
started his current position with a federal contractor. He is the president and Chief 
Operating Officer, with an annual salary of $150,000. According to his budget, his net 
monthly income is $9,746 and his expenses are $8,895, leaving a remainder of about 
$850. According to the November 2007 CBR, Applicant is managing his current 
financial obligations. (GE 4).   
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor and the company’s security officer are aware of his 
previous financial problems. (Tr. 68).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                            
1SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $20,562 debt; SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $17,582 debt, although the November 
2007 CBR lists the debt as $10,446; and SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $3,938 debt. 
 
 
 
 
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
 
 
 
5
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and maybe 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt after his steel 
business failed in 2003. He resolved all of the financial obligations arising from that 
endeavor, except three credit card debts that remain unresolved today, partially 
because he has not had the money to do so. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
 
6
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  The circumstances underlying Applicant’s financial difficulties were “unusual,” 
and were brought about by an unpredicted economic recession in the steel business 
starting after he purchased the company in 2000. Those circumstances were “beyond 
his control” and do not cast doubt on his reliability or good judgment. While winding 
down the multi-million dollar business, he resolved two loans, five or six credit card 
debts, and offered to resolve the three debts listed in the SOR. His actions 
demonstrated responsible conduct. It is particularly impressive that Applicant used his 
own retirement savings to resolve some of these debts, voluntarily foregoing his future 
financial retirement security to repay his business debts.  He did not file bankruptcy for 
his business or his personal finances.  He did not avoid or deny his financial obligations 
in closing out the steel business he operated, which only failed because of market 
conditions over which he had no control.  He is currently employed and does not intend 
to start another business. Prior to this situation, he never experienced financial 
difficulties. Both AG ¶ 19(a) and AG  ¶ 19(b) are applicable. 
 Applicant did not obtain financial counseling, but worked with his lawyer in 
resolving his failed business and the debts that resulted. He relied on his attorney’s 
advice in these matters.  At this time, there is no evidence that the three debts listed in 
the SOR have been resolved; hence, AG ¶ 19(c) has limited application. 
 Applicant’s lawyer attempted to resolve the three debts a couple of years ago. 
Although his lawyer corresponded with the creditors in 2004 or 2005 with an offer to 
settle the debts, they never responded, until very recently. That previous offer can be 
construed as a “good-faith” attempt to resolve the matters, and is sufficient to trigger a 
partial application of AG ¶ 1(d). If he had documented a subsequent attempt to resolve 
the matter, full application of the mitigating condition would be warranted. 
 The record evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 1.e and AG ¶ 1.f. 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
 
 
7
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 49-year-old man, who 
had been in an accounting partnership for twenty years before he decided to buy a steel 
business in 2000. He received a $5 million dollar loan from his bank and a $400,000 
loan from a local development group, indicating their strong support for the endeavor. 
When the business failed in 2003 because of economic changes in the marketplace, he 
worked with the bank to resolve the outstanding $2,450,000 on the loan and with the 
development group to resolve a $400,000 loan. At the time he was closing the business 
in 2004 to 2005, he also held seven or eight credit cards with an aggregate balance of 
$40-42,000. Through the assistance of his lawyer, he resolved all of those accounts by 
2005, but the three alleged in the SOR. Seemingly, the only reason they were not 
resolved at the time was because the creditors failed to respond to the lawyer’s written 
inquiries. Recently, one of them contacted Applicant. 
 
All of Applicant’s actions, while closing the business, demonstrate a pattern of 
responsible behavior in managing his financial obligations, including the forfeiture of his 
401(k) and equity in his home. At the time, he could have chosen to file bankruptcy, but 
did not. He acknowledged his three remaining debts and expressed an intention to 
resolve them. Prior to this financial predicament, he had not experienced financial 
difficulties and had managed to accumulate sufficient assets and reputation to warrant a 
bank’s trust and support in his business. According to the most recent CBR, he 
continues to manage his current obligations. His employer is aware of the security 
concerns.  
 
 While Applicant could have been more persistent in seeking a resolution of the 
SOR debts, and especially after receiving the SOR and learning of the Government’s 
concerns, I believe, based on his past performance of responsibly paying his debts, he 
will resolve the remaining debts in the near future. He made the attempt to pay them 
three years ago, and only the failure of the creditors to respond to his offers prevented 
his resolution of these debts before now.  He is very aware of the effect that such 
obligations may have on his employment and is concerned about his credit rating. I do 
not believe similar financial problems will recur.  I give great weight to the professionally 
responsible manner in which Applicant worked diligently to resolve the closure of his 
former business. These actions reflect favorably upon his honesty and his integrity.  
There is no other evidence in his background to indicate that his financial problems may 
create a security risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
