                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-13692 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 9, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and 
revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
 2
                                                                                                                                                                              
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 9, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 2, 2008, was provided to 
her, and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.2 Submissions were due by August 21, 2008. 
Applicant timely submitted additional material, which arrived at DOHA on 
August 21, 2008. On August 22, 2008, Department Counsel interposed 
no objection to Applicant’s submissions. The case was assigned to me 
on September 2, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c. through 1.l., and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.b. A number of her admissions were done “with reservations” and each 
response was accompanied by an explanation.  Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old systems engineer, who has worked for her 
defense contractor employer since December 1996. She seeks to renew her 
security clearance, which she has successfully held since approximately January 
1997.  
 
Her April 2007 e-QIP indicates she was awarded a masters of science 
degree in December 1997.3 Applicant was married from March 1978 to December 
1990. That marriage ended by divorce. She has a 27-year-old son. She has not 
remarried.4 
 
Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was 
issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s 
case. 
 
2 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated May 9, 2008; 
and Applicant acknowledged receipt on May 21, 2008, which DOHA received on July 25, 2008. 
The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to 
submit information. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 3
                                                          
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial history and 
included the review of her April 2007 e-QIP,5 her March 2008 DOHA Financial 
Interrogatory,6 a March 2008 Applicant letter with attachments,7 and her 
November 2007 credit bureau report.8  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 12 separate line items consisting of various 
debts, totaling approximately $38,543. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.l.  Included among the line 
items were her failure to file her 2005 federal income tax return, her failure to pay 
all federal income tax owed for tax year 2006 resulting in a $4,161 tax deficiency, 
and her failure to pay all her state income tax owed for tax years 2005 and 2006 
resulting in a $914 and $2,346 deficiencies, respectively. (SOR ¶¶1.i., 1.j., 1.k. 
and 1.l.) 
 
Since Applicant’s May 2008 SOR, she has paid, settled, made a good faith-
effort to pay/settle, or otherwise resolve all debts listed in that SOR. In particular, 
she has filed her 2005 federal income tax return, is making payments to the 
Internal Revenue Service for her 2006 tax deficiency, and has paid her 2005 and 
2006 state income tax deficiencies through garnishment. The other debts consist 
of credit card/personal debts, which have been addressed. The remaining debt of 
consequence is a charged off credit card debt of $12,611, which is in litigation 
with settlement and payment arrangements pending. Response to SOR, 
Response to FORM. 
 
Applicant encountered financial problems as a result of her inability to sell 
her second home/loss of rental income, and medical/ financial costs incurred as a 
result of assisting her adult son with his drug abuse/treatment problems. 
 
She explained in her Response to FORM: 
 
[M]y problems basically began when I was trying to sell a house that 
I owned in [different state]. My outstanding credit was high at that 
time as I had spent a considerable amount on my son’s drug 
rehabilitation, medical and living expenses, but I was keeping up 
with all my payments and responsibilities. However, without the 
rental income, and due to the extra mortgage and utility payments, I 
began falling behind. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 6. 
 
8 Item 7. 
 
 4
I called my creditors and tried to make arrangements that I could 
meet. However, since I was not behind, for the most part they were 
not willing to work with me. When the house sold, I did not receive a 
lot of cash, but with what I did receive, I paid down several credit 
cards, only to have them lower my limits (costing me additional over-
limit fees) and raise my interest to exorbitant fees. 
 
Additionally, the sale of the house also made a big change in my tax 
status, and I ended up with both state and federal taxes due. Before 
I dealt with that properly, the [state of residence] garnished my 
wages for overdue taxes.  
 
It is not my poor self control or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations that brought me into this state. A lack of judgment 
perhaps, because I spent too much to rehabilitate and support my 
son, and because in trying to find ways to settle my debts, I have 
better hindsight in knowing how to best handle these things than I 
did at the time. 
 
In 2007, Applicant sought financial counseling through her company’s 
Employee Assistance Program and participated in counseling and budget 
sessions. To reduce her housing costs, she has moved to a one bedroom 
apartment and her son no longer lives with her. Applicant continues to pay her 
son’s health insurance and provides him with limited support. In December 2007, 
Applicant took a second job as grocery clerk, but recently quit because her full-
time employer required her to travel and work overtime. Response to FORM. 
 
Applicant provided six reference letters offering character assessments 
from a professional and personal perspective. The authors were uniform in their 
praise of Applicant, and spoke of her integrity, loyalty, and recommended her for a 
clearance. Response to FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
 5
                                                          
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”9 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified 
information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case 
No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).10 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
9 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary 
evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing 
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 
(1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable 
and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent 
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion 
under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG ¶ 18, the Government’s concern is that an Applicant’s: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
 The Government established its case through Applicant’s admissions and 
evidence presented. At the time the SOR was issued, the Applicant had a history 
of unresolved indebtedness that had been ongoing for several years. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt 
or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial 
breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, 
high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
 7
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of 
living, increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be 
explained by subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets 
or returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of 
gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay 
gambling debts, family conflict or other problems caused by 
gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions listed supra, 
two are applicable, AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,11 I am able to apply ¶¶ (b), (c), and 
(d). Applicant did experience a financial setback as a result of being unable to sell her 
second home. She also incurred substantial expenses in assisting her son with his 
substance abuse problem. Applicant did participate in financial counseling, and has 
made a good-faith effort to pay, settle, and/or resolve her debts.  
 
 Nothing in the record supports the notion that Applicant incurred debt to live 
extravagantly or lived a questionable lifestyle. Admittedly, her choices were not always 
the most prudent, which she concedes. I do note and give her credit for making a good-
faith effort to put her financial house in order. She moved to a one bedroom apartment 
and took a part-time job as a grocery clerk until that conflicted with her full-time job. She 
has successfully held a security clearance for the past 11 years, and enjoys the full 
support of her colleagues and friends. Maintaining her employment allows her to 
continue paying down her debts. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”12 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is 
eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.l.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for accessed to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
