 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-13788 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-Qip), on September 21, 2006. On April 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 29, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on June 2, 2008, and I received the case assignment on June 10, 2008. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
 
notice of hearing on June 18, 2008, scheduling the hearing for July 16, 2008. On July 
10, 2008, Applicant requested a continuance for medical reasons. On July 15, 2008, 
DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing, rescheduling the hearing for August 20, 
2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. The Government also submitted a Government’s Exhibit 
List, which was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, and 
testified on her own behalf. I held the record open until August 29, 2008 to afford the 
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional material. The Applicant did not submit any 
post-hearing materials. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 2, 
2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., 1.f., 1.h., 1.j. – 1.o., and 1.q. She denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.e., 1.g., 1.i., and 1.p. She claimed the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. was 
the same debt as listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old contract analyst, who has worked for her defense 
contractor employer since October 2004. She is a first time applicant for a security 
clearance. GE 1, Tr. 12-14.  
 
Applicant finished the 10th grade, and was awarded a GED in October 1998. She 
estimates she has earned 20 college credit hours, and hopes to earn a bachelor of 
science degree in business. GE 1, Tr. 15-16. Applicant has never married and has a 15-
year-old son. She is the sole source of support for her son. Her son’s father is in prison 
and is not eligible for parole until 2031. GE 1, Tr. 12-13, 23. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included among other things the review of her September 2006 e-QIP, her November 
2007 Signed Response to Interrogatories and Attachments, and her April 2008 Credit 
Bureau Report. GE 1 – 3. 
 
Applicant’s SOR listed 17 different line items, consisting of ten collection 
accounts, three charged off accounts, two judgments, an allegation of failing to file her 
2004 federal income tax return and being assessed $3,180 in delinquent taxes, and an 
allegation of being financially incapable of paying her debts as evidenced by a personal 
financial statement showing a net monthly remainder of -$29.42. The total amount for 
16 debts alleged is approximately $25,228.  
 
Applicant stated she paid, does not owe, or otherwise resolved the debts she 
denied, identified supra. Applicant stated that she has filed her income returns since 
2005 and that the Internal Revenue Service has been recouping her 2004 tax liability 
 
3 
 
 
through subsequent refunds owed her. GE 2, Tr. 42-46, 56-58. Applicant did not provide 
any documentation during her hearing or post-hearing supporting her position that the 
debts she denied have been resolved. 
 
In Applicant’s November 2007 Response to Interrogatories and Attachments, she 
stated in part: 
 
As far as my financial status I am currently still in the red. Last year my 
cousin [name of cousin] passed away and we are in the process of selling 
her house, it has been sold but we are still wrapped up in the final steps 
before we receive the actual payment, you may wonder why I am even 
telling you this . . . but once we (my grandmother) has received the check 
she is giving a substantial amount to me. With this money I will be able to 
pay ALL of my DEBT!!! This is very exciting to me because I hate owing 
money to anyone. I currently work and pay the bills that are more important 
for my day to day living taking care of my family which are; rent, car, 
electric, phone, water things of that nature, not including putting gas in the 
car (which continues to rise, God Bless our Economy) and not to mention 
buying groceries! I do the best I can with what I have and sometimes it is 
just like the saying . . . rob Peter to pay Paul! I know that on paper I 
probably don’t shine in the best light but having bad credit doesn’t make me 
a bad person it is just the situation that I am in. GE 2. 
 
In response to Department Counsel’s query how she got into debt, Applicant 
stated: 
 
Okay. I have always worked. I had my son at a really young age, and from 
the time that he was probably two I have worked to take care of him the 
best that I can. And there is usually not a lot of services for working 
parents. If you make too much, you don’t get assistance, so I have always 
held a job down.  
 
But my main concern has always been to pay the bills that are necessary, 
like rent and electric and day care. If I had a debt, when I got extra money, 
as like taxes or something, I got a gift, I would always try to take care of 
things that weren’t like a monthly bill to me.  
 
When I was 18, I stupidly accepted a lot of credit cards that weren’t – I 
shouldn’t have taken. They were $200 credit cards, but now I owe 
thousands – you know, $1,000 on a credit card I never should have taken. 
I honestly didn’t – I didn’t understand, at that point in my life, what I was 
getting into. And because of my education, I never really had a good job. 
 
I moved from [state A] to [state B], and I got a job at the [state agency in 
state B], and that was my first professional job. In that job, I started at 
$6.37, but it was a job, and it was the right thing to do. And I moved up, 
 
4 
 
 
and when I left there I didn’t make a lot of money. Even to this day, I’m 
making $39,000, and that’s not a lot of money after taxes and everything 
else. You figure you have – gas costs $50, $60 a week, and to me that is 
a lot of money. 
 
So I look at – I look at today, and I say I need to pay rent, so I have a roof 
to give – to put over my son’s head, and make sure there is food in the 
house for him to eat, electric for him to, you know, turn on, water is 
running. Those are the necessity bills to me. If I ever get an opportunity to 
have extra money, I would pay those things off. But right now, that’s just 
not in a situation or a position that I’m in. 
 
I recently decided that I was going to file bankruptcy and have paid for 
that, to file in September, because I feel that’s the only way that I’m going 
to actually get a fair start, a fresh start, to give myself a better chance.  
 
At the job that I have now, I recently got a promotion, which was very nice, 
and it put me at $39,000 a year. It has the potential to go further. And with 
a security clearance, it will give my boss the trust that she already has in 
me, but she’ll have the Government backing – saying that I’m a 
trustworthy person, and she’ll be able to teach me more things, so that I 
can advance.  
 
And the way I look at that is my salary won’t decrease, it will increase in 
year from now. And after – not that I don’t – I don’t want to seem like I’m 
skipping out on not paying bills, but if I just get a chance to actually get a 
fair start that I feel like I never really had in my life, then I’ll have a place to 
start from. 
 
And now that I know what I’m supposed to do, and how to do it correctly, 
I’ll have that chance. And this is how I feel I can get it. Tr. 24-26. 
 
Applicant’s strategy to resolve her indebtedness is to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
She stated she has retained a bankruptcy attorney, paid his retainer fee, but still had to 
pay the $199 filing fee, which she planned to do by September 10, 2008. She stated her 
bankruptcy attorney was going to file her bankruptcy petition on September 15, 2008. 
Tr. 28-29. Applicant also stated she signed up to meet with a financial planner on 
September 30, 2008 to learn how to make a budget and assist her in financial planning. 
Tr. 47. 
 
Applicant did not submit any employee performance evaluations, reference 
letters or character evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG ¶ 18, the Government’s concern is that an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or 
inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations that has been 
ongoing since she was 18 years old, a period of approximately 12 years. Although she 
claims six of her debts have been resolved, she failed to submit any documentation 
supporting her assertions. Even if what Applicant claims is completely accurate, she has 
ten unpaid debts. She failed to file her 2004 federal income tax return, and has a 
negative net monthly remainder.  
 
Applicant hopes to include the majority of her debts in a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
yet to be filed. For these debts, her financial recovery plan is prospective in nature. 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations; and FC DC ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same; apply in this case.  
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude that Applicant is unable 
to receive credit under any of the potential Financial Considerations Mitigating 
Conditions (FC MC), which would include FC MC ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; FC MC 
20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there 
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, and FC MC 
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing. She has either not paid or 
been unable to pay her debts. For those debts she claims have been resolved, she has 
not provided documentation substantiating her claims. Applicant presented minimal or 
no evidence documenting efforts taken to contact or resolve debts with her unpaid 
creditors. Although she stated she has financial counseling scheduled, it as well as her 
pending bankruptcy, are prospective in nature. Assuming Applicant successfully 
1  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
7 
 
 
completes the bankruptcy process, time will tell whether she will reach a state of 
financial stability.  
 
She presented no evidence to show she has dealt responsibly with her financial 
obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, credible payment plans). Applicant’s financial history and lack 
of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she has established a track record of 
financial responsibility, or that she has taken control of her financial situation. Based on 
her past performance, her prospective assurances ring hollow. Her financial problems 
are likely to be a concern in the future. Moreover, her financial problems are recent, not 
isolated, and ongoing.  
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
difficulties.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.q.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
