                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12536 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Franciso Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 30, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 7, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 11, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on September 4, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
5, and they were admitted without objections. Applicant testified and did not submit any 
exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 11, 2008  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old man who works for a federal contractor. He graduated 
from high school in 1998. He is the father of two young daughters. He denies the 
judgment listed in SOR 1.a. This debt is for unpaid parking tickets that Applicant claims 
were issued to a car that he sold. He stated the car was still in his name, but he did not 
own it any longer. Applicant failed to provide any documentary evidence to support his 
denial.1 
 
 Applicant stated that he paid the debt listed in SOR 1.b on August 28, 2008.2 The 
debt was for unpaid rent from October 2005. He stated the reason he did not pay it 
when it was due was because he did not have the money. He did not have documentary 
evidence to substantiate his position.3 
 
 Applicant incurred the debt in SOR 1.c in April 2002. It is a bill for cable services 
that had not been paid. He stated he could not pay it at the time because he did not 
make enough money.4 
 
 Applicant has owed the debt in SOR 1.d since 2002 for electric services. He 
attempted to make a payment arrangement with the creditor when he contacted them 
approximately one to two years ago. The creditor would not set up a payment schedule 
and wanted the payment in full. This debt remains delinquent.5 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.e is for cable services that has been due since August 
2003.6 It remains delinquent.7 
 
1 Tr. 22-26; GE 4. 
 
2 Tr. 20; GE 1, page 9. 
 
3 Tr. 26-29. 
 
4 Tr. 29-30; GE 1 page 11. 
 
5 Tr. 31-33. 
 
6 GE 2, page 10. 
 
7 Tr. 33-34; GE 1 page 10 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt listed in SOR 1.f is for child support. Applicant stated he resolved the 
delinquency with the mother of his daughters. He is obligated to pay $700 a month. He 
stated that the mother apparently stated she did not want child support and then 
changed her mind and went to court to receive it. He stated the case was mediated and 
it was decided he did not have to pay through the state system. Applicant claims he is 
not in arrears and does not owe child support, but failed to provide any documentary 
evidence to support his position. His credit report lists the debt and he also listed it on 
his security clearance application as a delinquent debt.8  
 
 Applicant has not paid the debt listed in SOR 1.g. This debt is with a collection 
agency. Applicant did not recognize the debt, but did not research the original creditor.9 
 
 Applicant stated he did not recognize the debt listed in SOR 1.h. He listed this 
debt on his SCA, but denied it on his answer to the SOR. At his hearing he stated he did 
not know what the debt was for. He has not paid the debt or disputed it with supporting 
documents.10  
 
 Applicant has not paid the debts in SOR 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n. Some of them 
he denies he knows who the creditors are, but has not disputed the debts or attempted 
to resolve. Others he admits he owes, but has not paid. Others he admits he owes the 
debt, but disputes the amount, but has not contacted the creditors to dispute the debt.11 
 
 Applicant stated he has a net monthly salary of $3,200. After he pays his 
expenses and child support, he estimated he has approximately $1,000. He stated that 
in addition to his child support of $700 for his daughters, he spends approximately 
another $350 on them each month, buying clothes and other items.12  
 
 Applicant has been working for the past ten years and was unemployed about a 
year and a half ago for a period of three to four months. During that time he could not 
afford to pay his bills. He is trying to pay his bills, but does not have a budget and 
admitted he spends money on “stupid stuff.” He admitted he never learned how to save 
money, but he is doing the best he can. He has not had financial counseling. Applicant 
is trying to pay his debts “step by step” and needs time to pay off his bills.13  
 
  
 
8 Tr. 20-22, 34-59; GE 1 and 5. 
 
9 Tr. 61-65; GE 3. 
 
10 Tr. 65-70; GE 1, page 10. 
 
11 Tr. 71-72. 
 
12 Tr. 72-83. 
 
13 Tr. 84-88. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has 
many debts that have been delinquent for a long period and they remain unpaid. 
Applicant has been unable and unwilling to pay his delinquent debts. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the individual has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”). 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he has many delinquent debts that remain 
unpaid. He does not have a budget or a realistic plan for resolving his debts. Applicant 
had a period of unemployment, but also admitted that he does not really budget his 
excess income and spends it on “stupid stuff.” In find (a) does not apply. In order for (b) 
to apply Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. I cannot find 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. He does not have a plan to 
resolve his debts and he spends his excess income frivolously. Therefore, I find (b) 
does not apply. Applicant offered no evidence that he received financial counseling or 
that there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or under control. He failed 
to provide evidence he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. I find (c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant appears to be a hard 
worker and sincere in wanting to better his predicament and pay his delinquent debts, 
but he has not taken a proactive approach to doing so. He needs to set up a budget and 
seek financial counseling so he can better understand how to manage his money. Until 
then his cycle of frustration will likely continue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
