1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13028
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
 Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (eQIP), on
December 23,  2005. On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
for Applicant under Guidelines F, E, and J. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 16, 2008 and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 
20, 2008. I received the case assignment on May 27, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on June 3, 2008, for a hearing on June 20, 2008. I convened the hearing on
that date. 
At the hearing, the government offered four exhibits (Exhs 1-4) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted two exhibits in addition to
the one attached to his answer (Exhs. A-C) which were admitted without objection. He
testified on his own behalf and three witnesses testified as character witnesses. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 30, 2008. I granted Applicant’s
request to keep the record open until August 15, 2008, to submit additional evidence. A
set of documents (Exhs. D Items 1-14) was received August 18, 2008, and admitted in
evidence without objection. I requested a supplemental submission that was received
on September 5, 2008, and admitted without objection (Exh. E, one page). 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a government contractor for the
Department of State. He has been employed as a program analyst since 1989. He has
held a top secret clearance since he began to work for the Department of State in 1989.
The work involves diplomatic security. 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted with explanation 14 of the 16 financial
allegations in the SOR relating to approximately $45,000 in delinquent debts. He denied
two of the financial allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.m.). He also denied the two
allegations under personal conduct and the single allegation under criminal conduct. 
Applicant filed his SF 86 almost three years ago in December 2005 after a
divorce from his second wife. All but one of his debts were from credit cards used during
that marriage. There was still an outstanding controversy over responsibility for jointly
incurred debts. His initial approach was to attempt to have a division of responsibility for
the debts with his former wife. He continued on an unproductive course in that effort
until the security clearance issues arose. 
A major reason Applicant did not take effective action to resolve the marital debt
issues because he was pre-occupied with caring for the woman who is now his wife
after she received multiple injuries in an equestrian accident in July 2005 when a horse
fell on top of her. The accident required her to have extensive hospitalization for over a
year to learn to walk again. In addition to causing Applicant to take proper care of other
responsibilities, he took extensive leave without pay and borrowed on his 401k to help
pay for her nursing care.(Tr. 50-51).
Applicant decided this year to pay his delinquent accounts by withdrawal of
sufficient funds from his 401k account with his former employer. The account had over
$100,000 in it before the withdrawal. He communicated by telephone and mail with all
3
the creditors without much success and this year wrote a formal letter to each one (Exh.
B). He provided evidence of the withdrawal of funds from the 401k (Exh. E), and has
now resolved all of the debts. He has settled two of debts for slightly less than the claim
(SOR¶¶ 1. k. and 1.l.) and paid all others in full (Exh. D). The one remaining debt (SOR
¶ 1.b.) that amounted to over half of the total delinquent debts alleged in the SOR was
dropped by the creditor who notified Applicant and three credit reporting agencies that
they were unable to verify the debt and that it should be deleted (Exh. D, Item 2). He
learned that he did owe the two debts he denied in his answer and has paid both of
them. While he was late in taking care of the debts, they are all now resolved. 
When Applicant submitted his SF86 in 2005, he was in the midst of the divorce
and knew there were some debts outstanding, but he was not fully aware of the extent
of them. He was attempting to divide responsibility for joint accounts with his wife. He
inquired of his security officer how to answer Question 28 regarding delinquent debts of
90 and 180 days duration. He was advised he could answer “yes” and describe them as
best he could or “no” and then tell the investigator who would interview him about the
debts. He opted for the second choice and told the investigator of the debts when he
was asked about them. Applicant sought to find the security officer to corroborate his
claim relating to her advice, but she had moved to another company and could not be
located.
Applicant is highly regarded by his employer (Exh. A) and his supervisors. Three
of his colleagues and supervisors testified for him regarding the quality of his work and
ethic (Tr. 20-40). His salary is approximately $4,500 a month and he has approximately
$600 remaining each month after his mortgage payment of $1,600 and other bills are
paid (Tr. 100-101). His wife recently has recovered from her accident and is now
employed with a monthly salary of between $1,600 and $2,000 (Tr. 119). He has no
other financial difficulties. He has three credit cards which he regularly pays. He has
one grown son for whom he has no financial responsibility. 
Applicant served honorably in the Navy from 1982 until 1989 when he took his
present position. He left the service as a 3  Class Petty Officer. He joined the Nationalrd
Guard in 1993 and left in 1996 as a Specialist 4  class. th
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
4
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
if the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt and was unable to pay
some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. These include:
Evidence that “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control(loss of employment, ....unexpected medical emergency, or
divorce), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances “, or under AG
¶20 (b), “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control@ under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.@ Applicant’s problems in resolving the debts arose from the divorce and was
aggravated by loss of income and pre-occupation by problems in the recovery of his
current wife. He has resolved all of the delinquent debts, either by payment, settlement,
being dropped by the creditor because the debt could not be verified. He is now on
financially sound footing and prepared for future contingencies. Despite delays in
resolving the debts, he has now done so. I conclude that the mitigating conditions apply
since the matters have been resolved and that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances which he encountered. 
Guideline E Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG & 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, and
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about and an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information (AG ¶ 15).
Conditions that could raise a security concern and be disqualifying include the
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any
personnel security questionnaire (AG ¶ 16 (a)). Applicant’s failure to report certain
financial delinquencies (SOR ¶¶ 2.a.-n.) at Question 28 a (Delinquent debts of over 180
days), and at Question 28 b (Delinquent debts of over 90 days) on his SF 86, prompted
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
The requirement of the guideline is that the omissions be deliberately false. I
conclude that they were not in view of the circumstances surrounding the situation that
prevailed with Applicant in 2005. 
6
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG¶ 30:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns for an
applicant. One of them that may be a disqualifying condition (DC) is a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses (AG ¶ 31 (a). The allegation relates to 18 U.S.C. 1001
which provides a penalty of a $10,000 fine and five years of imprisonment for falsification
of material facts on a security clearance application. I concluded that the omissions were
not deliberate under the circumstances of the case. Thus, Applicant has mitigated the
allegation. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case.
Applicant presented evidence of the circumstances surrounding his delinquent
debts, his divorce, the medical problems of his current wife, the submission of this SF 86,
and the resolution of the debts. I found he has mitigated the security concerns arising
from the financial problems and the omissions on his SF 86. His current financial
situation is good and the financial problems are unlikely to be repeated. There is no
potential for pressure or exploitation and I believe he has learned from this experience.
His work record is steady and continuous for almost 20 years since he left two periods of
7
active military service. He has strong recommendations from his supervisors for his
work, conduct, and reputation. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.:   For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.:  For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.:  For Applicant
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is granted. 
____________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
