 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18692 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On July 11, 2005, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (e-
QIP). On May 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 5, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 17, 2008, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy on July 21, 2008. Applicant received the FORM on July 25, 
2008, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. On August 18, 2008, DOHA received additional information from Applicant. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the materials. On August 22, 2008, I was 
assigned the case. I marked Applicant’s submission as Exhibit (AE) 1.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated June 5, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b of the SOR, with explanations.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and was born in the United States in 1975. Her mother 
(now deceased) was a U.S. citizen and her father is a Canadian citizen. In 1980, the 
family moved to Canada from the United States. She lived in Canada until 1994, when 
she returned to the United States to attend college. During the summer months, she 
lived with her family in Canada. After graduating from college in 1998, she returned to 
Canada to live and work for a Canadian company. She visited the United States 
frequently for work and to see friends. In July 2004, Applicant returned to the United 
States to live and work, permanently, while pursuing a graduate degree.  
 
 In May 2005, Applicant began a position, as a senior client manager, with her 
current employer, a federal contractor. In July 2005, she completed an e-QIP. 
Sometime in 2006, she completed her graduate program. In June 2006, she voted in a 
Canadian election. In her August 2008 Response to the FORM regarding her decision 
to vote in that election, she stated: 
 
At the time of the Canadian election in 2006, [I] had lived in that country 
for that majority of [my] life, and [my] emotional connection to Canada was 
strong. [My] present ties to the country are fewer, and [my] current 
willingness to renounce [my] Canadian citizenship in favor of sole United 
States citizenship demonstrate that further exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship, including involvement with Canadian 
electoral procedures, is unlikely. (AE 1 at 2). 
 
She further stated in the Response that she recently voted in a state 
primary in February 2008, and “has no intentions of voting in any future Canadian 
elections.” (Id. at 3).   
 
 In January 2008, Applicant purchased a home in the United States. She has a 
significant relationship with a U.S. citizen, who has been a federal employee for 15 
years. (Id. at 4). She works for a U.S. company. She has “lived in the United States for a 
significant part of her adult life and has planted roots here, demonstrating an intent to 
remain in the US and her preference for that country.” (Id. at 6). “Since taking up 
 
3 
 
 
permanent residence in the US, [she] has developed stronger ties to US interests and 
has lost touch with many Canadian friends and associates. She now visits Canada only 
1 or 2 times per year to see family.” (Id. at 3). 
 
Applicant obtained her first U.S. passport on December 27, 2005. Prior to 
that, she used a Canadian passport to travel back and forth between the 
countries, including trips in August 2005, October 8, 2005, October 16, 2005, and 
during a trip over the 2005 holidays. (Item 5 at 138). Since receiving her U.S. 
passport, she has not used her Canadian passport. After learning of the 
Government’s security concerns, Applicant surrendered her Canadian passport 
to her Facility Security Officer, who destroyed it in February 2008.  (AE 1 at 144). 
She did not realize that using her Canadian passport instead of her U.S. passport 
could be construed as an indication of one’s national preference. (Id. at 6). She is 
willing to renounce her Canadian citizenship in favor of the United States. (Id. at 
144). 
 
Applicant’s past actions, which served as the basis for the two allegations 
in the SOR, were not willful or negligent, but rather the result of a lack of 
information. She asserts that her “preference is with the United States and 
knowing that these actions were seen as negative is troubling and not indicative 
of her intentions or preference.” (Id. at 3). She believes that the “future exercise 
of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship is highly unlikely.” (Id. at 
6).   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
4 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference that arises: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Department Counsel argued that the evidence in this case 
established two of them: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
  *      *      * 
 
5 
 
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election. 
Applicant was born in the United States in 1975. She had a Canadian passport 
that she used for travel between the United States and Canada until she obtained a 
U.S. passport at the end of December 2005. In February 2008, the Canadian passport 
was destroyed.  In July 2004, she decided to live permanently in the United States. In 
June 2006, she voted in a Canadian election. Based on the evidence in the record, 
including Applicant’s admissions, the Government produced substantial evidence of 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10(a)(3) and  AG ¶ 10(a)(7). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those conditions, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the resulting 
security concerns. AG ¶ 11 provides eleven conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in 
a foreign country;  
 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant’s dual citizenship is based on her father’s Canadian citizenship, which 
triggers the application of AG ¶ 11(a). After becoming aware that her Canadian passport 
could potentially have an adverse effect on her employment, she destroyed it in 
February 2008. Hence, AG ¶ 11(e) applies. In her Answer to the SOR and Response to 
the FORM, she emphasized that she was unaware that her actions could be interpreted 
as her preference for Canada over the United States, and she would willingly renounce 
her Canadian citizenship. In addition, she demonstrated her loyalty to the United States, 
based on strong connections to it, such as her intention to live here permanently, 
earning a graduate degree from a U.S. university, her relationship with a U.S. citizen, 
who works for the federal government, the purchase of property, employment with a 
U.S. company for four years, and voting in a recent U.S. election. As a result of her 
willingness to renounce her Canadian citizenship and her current ties to the United 
States, I conclude AG ¶ 11(b) applies.   
In support of the application of AG ¶ 11(b), I cite the Appeal Board’s opinion in 
ISCR Case No. 03-4300 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006) that held the following: 
In concluding Applicant had mitigated the security concerns raised by her 
acts of foreign preference by application of Guideline C Mitigating 
Condition 4, the Administrative Judge articulated a rational explanation for 
her determination—basing it on such factors as the Applicants’ strong ties 
and loyalties to the United States, the extensive effort undertaken by the 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant to surrender her passport and renounce her Russian citizenship 
before the close of the record, and the fact that Applicant’s lack of 
awareness concerning the requirements expressed in the ASDC3I memo 
and the Guideline C Mitigating Conditions may have affected the timing of 
her renunciation actions. There are no stated requirements in Guideline C 
Mitigating Condition 4 concerning when an applicant is required to comply 
with its provisions.1  
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential 
concern under Guideline C resulted from two choices she made after she decided to 
permanently move to the United States in July 2004. Since learning of the significance 
of her past actions, she destroyed her passport in February 2008 (before the SOR 
issued), expressed a willingness to renounce her Canadian citizenship, and asserted 
her preference for the United States. She is building a future here with her employer 
and friends. There is no other derogatory information in the record.  Based on the 
evidence, I do not believe she is a threat to the United States. She made two mistakes 
that she is unlikely to repeat.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under foreign preference.  
                                                          
1 Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition 4 under the previous adjudicative Guideline C, stated 
as follows: “Individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” E2.A3.1.3.4. The 
ASDC31 memo referenced does not have applicability to this case and pertained to the surrender of 
foreign passports. 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
