                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-14432 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 6 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated May 7, 2008). GE 6 is the 
source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Guideline G (alcohol consumption). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 13, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (Government Exhibit (GE) 7). On August 19, 
2008, the case was assigned to me. At the hearing held on September 17, 2008, 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GEs 1-4) (Transcript (Tr.) 10, 16-17), and 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 11). There were no objections, and I admitted 
GE 1-4 (Tr. 17). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and Hearing 
Notice (GE 5-7). I received the transcript on September 23, 2008. At Applicant’s 
request, I authorized until September 25, 2008, for him to submit documentation about 
three random urinalysis tests reflecting no alcohol or drug use (Tr. 50-51). However, no 
such documentation was received.3  
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant disclosed that in April 2007 he was sent home from 
work because he had alcohol on his breath. He subsequently received additional 
alcohol treatment and counseling. At Department Counsel’s request and without 
objection, I granted the motion to amend the SOR to include these two allegations 
under Guideline G (Tr. 44-46). These two additional allegations are designated 
subparagraphs 1.l and 1.m respectively.  
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 
1.h, and 1.j (GE 7). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact.   
 
 Applicant is 57 years old (Tr. 5). He completed 12 years of school; however, he 
did not graduate from high school (Tr. 5-6). He began working at a shipyard in 1971, 
and has continued to work in the shipyard thereafter (Tr. 6). He is a sheet-metal worker 
(Tr. 41). He currently holds a clearance at the secret level (Tr. 6). He has not had any 
clearance problems aside from the issues address in this decision for the 30 years he 
 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3I specifically find Applicant was credible in regard to the results of his three random urinalysis 
tests. I accept those results as accurate without corroborating documentation. 
 
4Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. GEs 2 and 3 (Responses to Interrogatories) and 9 (Response 
to SOR) are the sources for the facts in this section unless stated otherwise.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
has held a clearance (Tr. 40). He married when he was 21-years-old and divorced in 
2001 (Tr. 24, 33). He has a 24-year-old son, and a 16-year-old daughter (Tr. 33). He 
has two grandchildren (Tr. 33). 
 
Alcohol-related arrests 
 
 On September 15, 2001, Applicant was arrested for DUI and failure to reduce 
speed (SOR ¶ 1.c, GE 7 at 2). He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to serve 72 hours 
in jail, pay $150 in fines/costs, and placed on probation for 12 months. Id. 
 
    On January 20, 2003, Applicant was charged with drunk in public. He was found 
guilty, fined $25, and required to pay costs of $64 (SOR ¶ 1.e, GE 7 at 2). 
 
 On February 26, 2004, Applicant was charged with DUI and reckless driving 
(SOR ¶ 1.f, GE 7 at 2). He was found guilty and sentenced to serve 30 days in jail, with 
25 days suspended, and ordered to attend an Alcohol Safety Action Program (ASAP). 
Id. His driver’s license was restricted, and he was fined $250 plus costs of $199. Id. 
 
 On July 16, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, reckless driving, 
and failure to obey traffic light (SOR ¶ 1.h, GE 7 at 2). He was found guilty and 
sentenced to 12 months in jail (all confinement except for 20 days was suspended), 
fined $1,000 plus costs of $333, and ordered to attend SARP. Id. His driver’s license 
was suspended for three years. Id. 
 
 The SOR alleges he was arrested in January 2006 for DUI, and held in jail for 
four days (SOR ¶ 1.i). Applicant disclosed the 2006 DUI in his security clearance 
application, but he did not disclose any other DUIs (GE 1, § 23). He noted the location 
of the offense as being in North Carolina, and his sentence as a fine and one-year 
suspension of his license. Id. On January 9, 2007, an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) described Applicant’s description of the 2006 DUI as 
follows (GE 2): 
 
Jan 06, DUI, ____ , NC—He hit a parked car along a highway at night 
after he had consumed two to three six-packs of beer over a four to five 
hour period. He drank the beer in a bar and while driving. He was pulling 
off the road because he had become sleepy. He did not see it, but there 
was a car parked in the dark along the road and subject hit it. A ____ 
police officer came to the accident scene and administered a breath test to 
subject. He was put in the ____ County Jail for around four days then 
released. He obtained a lawyer, but he was found guilty of DUI 
nonetheless. He recalled losing his privilege to drive in North Carolina for 
a year and he attended a DUI class. He could not recall any other details 
about the class.    
 
In addition to the DUIs described above, the OPM interview also noted one or 
two DUIs from a long time ago, but also noted he was unsure of the details (GE 2). 
Applicant’s SOR response denied the 2006 DUI (GE 7). At his hearing, he explained he 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
thought the 2006 DUI was actually the 2001 DUI because he had only been in that 
North Carolina city on one occasion (Tr. 34-38). When Applicant completed the DOHA 
interrogatories and adopted the OPM statement, he did not disagree with the OPM 
investigator’s description because he “mentally probably didn’t pick it up” (Tr. 35-36).     
 
Alcohol rehabilitation and counseling 
 
 Applicant self-referred for alcohol counseling and treatment in the 1970s when he 
was in his early 20s (SOR ¶ 1.b, GE 7 at 1, Tr. 23-24). His alcohol treatment in the 
1970s included in-patient treatment for some months (Tr. 38). He also received alcohol 
treatment from November 2001 to at least December 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.d, GE 7 at 2).    
 
 Applicant attended a 26-week substance abuse rehabilitation program (SARP) 
from about May 25, 2004, until November 29, 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.g, GE 7 at 2). He was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Id. 
 
 Applicant had black out spells where he was unable to remember his alcohol 
consumption or where he was, but the most recent one he could recall was “maybe” five 
years ago (Tr. 33). 
 
 Applicant completed a 26-week SARP on about April 12, 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.j, GE 7 
at 2). The SARP recommended ongoing abstinence, 12-step attendance, and relapse 
prevention. (Id., Tr. 25). 
 
Applicant said he had years of sobriety, and then he would have an alcohol 
problem (Tr. 16). Once he went five years without consuming alcohol, another time it 
was two years (Tr. 21-22). He drank his last alcohol on April 29, 2007, about 15 months 
prior to his hearing (Tr. 20).  
 
 Applicant received counseling through the 12-step program sponsored by 
Alcoholic’s Anonymous (AA) in 2007 and 2008 (Tr. 26). He said he reached the 5th– 
step, but was unable to describe that step (Tr. 26).  He said he once had a sponsor, but 
was unsure of when (Tr. 26). He said his last AA meeting was on April 30, 2007 (Tr. 26-
27). He conceded he misstated that he attended AA in 2008 (Tr. 27).  He continued to 
consume alcohol up until April 2007 (Tr. 27). From April 2006 to April 2007, he was 
drinking a beer a day (Tr. 27). 
 
 In April 2007, Applicant had alcohol on his breath at work at 3:30 p.m. from 
drinking a beer at 6:00 a.m. that morning (Tr. 29). He was suspended from work (Tr. 
30). He attended an outpatient, alcohol-treatment program for eight weeks (Tr. 28-30). 
He said the prognosis from the 2007 therapy program said “good things on my progress 
and all that jazz” (Tr. 31). He did not have any other alcohol-related problems at work 
(Tr. 39-40). 
 
 Applicant returned to work after completing the 2007 alcohol treatment program 
(Tr. 32).  His employer tested him three times for alcohol, and he passed each time (Tr. 
32). Applicant was not concerned about consuming alcohol in the future (Tr. 32). He 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
had AA books, and the support of his family to help him overcome alcohol abuse (Tr. 
32). He knew that he was close to retirement eligibility and alcohol abuse would harm 
his economic future (Tr. 33).  
 
Applicant’s driver’s license is currently suspended and has been suspended for 
the last three years because of his most recent driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI) in 2005 (Tr. 18). He believed his license would be reinstated once he obtained a 
vehicle with an automatic breath-alcohol testing and locking device (Tr. 19-20). He also 
needed to pay his fines from the 2005 DUI (Tr. 18).  
 
Applicant wanted to continue to apply the knowledge and experience he had 
gained over his 37 years working at the shipyard to help the shipyard (Tr. 42). He 
described his job performance as exemplary and emphasized it was separate from his 
alcohol consumption (Tr. 42). He recognized that alcohol abuse was an issue, but 
believed he could continue to abstain from alcohol consumption (Tr. 42). He wanted to 
continue to contribute to the company and national defense (Tr. 42).  
 
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must 
consider Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are 
used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply 
these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process 
provision in Section E2.2, Enclosure 2, of the Directive. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
 
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that the issuance of the 
clearance is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.5 The government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 
provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” The burden of disproving a mitigating 
condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a 
relationship that transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours 
as well. It is because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose 
a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise 
of classified information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.”  See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
 
5“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6‟The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, [evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and [decides] whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 22(c), 22(d), 22(e) and 22(g) do not apply. Currently, he does not 
habitually consume or engage in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired 
judgment. Binge drinking is not defined in the Directive and is not established. A 
qualified medical professional or licensed clinical social worker did not determine 
Applicant had an alcohol abuse or dependence problem. He did not fail to follow any 
court orders regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment or abstinence. Although 
he received an alcohol evaluation from an alcohol or addiction counselor, this credential 
does not meet the requirements of AG ¶¶ 22(d) or 22(e).  
AG ¶ 22(a) applies. Applicant was convicted of DWIs in 2001, 2004 and 2005, 
and drunk in public in 2003. AG ¶ 22(b) applies. He was sent home from work in April 
2007 because he had the smell of alcohol on his breath. AG ¶ 22(f) applies. He 
received in-patient treatment for alcohol for several months in the 1970s, and then had 
several relapses. He received less intensive, outpatient alcohol treatment in 2004 and 
was re-enrolled in 2005-2006 (GE 3). The outpatient alcohol treatment program ending 
on April 12, 2006, resulted in advice to abstain from alcohol consumption (GE 3).   
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) partially applies. Applicant had five documented alcohol-related 
incidents between 2001 and 2007 that had an adverse effect on his life. He was 
convicted of three DWIs, drunk in public on one occasion, and was sent home from 
work in 2007 because of alcohol on his breath. These five events are relatively frequent 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
and recent. He does not drink alcohol and drive, and accordingly he receives some 
credit because his DUIs, “happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a) cannot be fully applied because he continued to consume 
alcohol up until April 2007. Additionally, he admitted returning to alcohol consumption 
after previously abstaining from alcohol consumption for up to five years. 
AG ¶¶ 23(b) to 23(d) do not fully apply. Applicant did not acknowledge being 
alcohol dependent or being an alcoholic. He is minimizing his alcohol consumption 
problem. Although he completed alcohol abuse treatment programs in the 1970s, in 
2004, 2005-2006, and 2007, he stopped attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and 
does not currently attend any other alcohol treatment program. He stopped consuming 
alcohol in April 2007. His long history of alcohol problems and his failure to fully 
recognize his alcohol problem raises security concerns to receive full mitigating credit.  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a 
fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption.7  
 
After carefully consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption,8 I conclude his five alcohol-related incidents, relapses after alcohol 
counseling and treatment, and continued alcohol consumption up until April 2007 all 
raise security concerns. His alcohol-related therapy and treatment over the last thirty 
years are all positive developments, showing that he continues to struggle to overcome 
his alcohol problems. I therefore find For Applicant with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.g, 
1.j and 1.m. I find For Applicant in SOR ¶ 1.i because his 2006 DUI is not proven. I find 
For Applicant in SOR ¶ 1.k because he no longer consumes alcohol.  
 
 
 
 
7See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).   
 
8For example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board reversed an 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB had several alcohol-related 
legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 2000, six years before an administrative judge 
decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and 
sometimes drank alcohol (not to intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s 
continued alcohol consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and 
capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving case with most 
recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and reversing administrative judge’s grant of a 
clearance). 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
There is considerable evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. He 
revealed one of his DUIs and some of his alcohol treatment and therapy on his security 
clearance application. He provided much more detailed information about his alcohol 
problems to an OPM investigator. He admitted in his SOR response and at his hearing 
complete information to the best of his recollection. He raised his family and children 
and is a good citizen. He worked for 37 years at the shipyard and has held a secret 
clearance for 30 years. He has not had any DUIs since 2005, and stopped consuming 
alcohol in April 2007. He knows the consequences if he is caught with alcohol on his 
breath at work or has another DUI. He completed several alcohol treatment programs. 
Applicant is a valued employee, who contributes to his company and the Department of 
Defense. Aside from having alcohol on his breath in 2007, there is no evidence at work 
of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would 
intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance shows 
some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him 
or he would not have been able to retain his employment over the last three decades. I 
am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from alcohol consumption, he will have future 
potential for access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a substantial problem with alcohol abuse for about 30 years. He was 
convicted of DUIs in 2001, 2004 and 2005, and drunk in public in 2003. His employer 
sent him home from work in April 2007 because he had the smell of alcohol on his 
breath. He received in-patient treatment for alcohol for several months in the 1970s, and 
then had a relapse. He received less intensive, outpatient alcohol treatment in 2004 and 
was re-enrolled in 2005-2006 (GE 3). The outpatient alcohol treatment program ending 
on April 12, 2006, resulted in advice to abstain from alcohol consumption (GE 3). He 
was re-enrolled in alcohol treatment in 2007 after he was sent home from work because 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
he had alcohol on his breath. However, he is not currently receiving alcohol treatment 
and does not attend AA meetings. His problems with alcohol cannot be mitigated at this 
time. His decision to continue to drink alcohol over the years was knowledgeable, 
voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his 
conduct. Excessive alcohol consumption shows a lack of judgment and/or impulse 
control. Such conduct raises a serious security concern, and a security clearance is not 
warranted at this time. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption.    
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”9 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i to 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
9See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
