                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12203 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 30, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on September 10, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and did not submit any 
exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 17, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.i. The denied the 
remaining allegations with explanations. His admissions to the allegations in the SOR 
are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old engineering analyst technician who is employed by a 
defense contractor. He earned an associate’s degree in August 2007 and participated in 
a co-operative program offered by his present employer where he worked and went to 
school in exchange for tuition and a commitment of employment for a period of time. He 
intends to go back to school in January 2009 while continuing his employment. He 
served in the Army from 1994 to 1999 and was honorably discharged.1  
 
 Applicant was married in 1993, separated from his wife in approximately 1995, 
and finally divorced in 2002. He has a daughter from the marriage born in 1994. He is 
required to pay $372 monthly in child support. He admitted he fell behind for different 
periods of time when he was attending school, was unemployed or was not earning 
enough money. He admitted that sometimes he would pay a lesser amount than what 
was ordered. He is paying his child support and an additional amount each month to 
pay his back child support. He does not know how much he is in arrears, but estimated 
it is approximately $3,000 to $4,000. He testified that there are two states listed in the 
SOR that allege he is in arrears. This is because he pays the support through one 
state’s child support enforcement agency and it was not credited in the state where the 
child lives. His tax returns for the past three years have been seized to pay some of his 
arrearages. The support payments are garnished directly from his wages. Applicant 
admitted that he had not contacted the different states’ child support offices’ in the past 
year to see what the current status of his child support arrearages are.2 
 
 Applicant remarried in 2004 and has two small children. His wife was employed, 
but recently had their second child and is not working.  
 
 Applicant also pays through garnishment the judgment listed in SOR 1. h. This is 
a credit card debt. He believes he opened the account sometime in 1994. He does not 
know how much he still owes but believes it may be $87. The original amount owed was 
$841. Applicant pays the judgment listed in SOR 1.e through garnishment of his pay. 
He testified that his employer is only permitted to garnish up to 25% of his pay at one 
time, so he does not know exactly how much is being paid for this debt. The judgment 
was originally for $1,770. This debt was for a car that was repossessed in either 2001 or 
2002, Applicant could not remember.  
1 Tr. 52-54. 
 
2 Tr. 20-38, 55-60, 91-94; GE 5; Answer to SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt listed in SOR 1.a for $91 is for cable services from 1999. It is not paid.3 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.b for $127 is for a dental bill from approximately five or 
six years ago. He could not remember and it is not paid.4 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.c for $79 is for a veterinary bill from 2002 for Applicant’s 
cat. Applicant stated that prior to bringing the cat to the veterinarian he inquired as to 
the cost of the services. When the services were completed he was provided with a 
larger bill than he was originally told. Applicant disagreed and only paid a portion of the 
bill. Although he disputes the debt, he has not contacted the creditor, he did not provide 
proof that he paid anything on the bill, and he has not disputed it with the credit bureau.5  
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.d for $1,245 is a credit card debt. Applicant went over 
the spending limit and attempted to discontinue the card, but because he was over the 
limit the card was not canceled. Applicant has taken no steps to make payments on this 
debt that has been owed since 2002.6 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.e for $1,770 is a judgment for car repossession. He 
bought the car in 2000 or 2001 and it was repossessed a few months after the 
transaction. He stated that an amount is being garnished from his pay, but he does not 
know how much he is paying or how much he owes.7  
 
 The debt in SOR 1.f for $374 is a judgment from an apartment complex where 
Applicant and his second wife lived. He did not provide the apartment complex with a 
forwarding address when they moved. He denied the debt because he stated he had 
not been contacted by the creditor. He has not taken any action to pay or resolve this 
debt.8 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.g was for a debit card transaction at a convenience 
store. He owes $33 and has not paid the debt. He estimated the debt is about five years 
old.9 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.h for $841 is a judgment for a delinquent credit card. 
Applicant opened the card in approximately 1994. He stated an amount is being 
3 Tr. 60-61. 
 
4 Tr. 61-62. 
 
5 Tr. 62-64. 
 
6 Tr. 64-65. 
 
7 Tr. 43-50. 
 
8 Tr. 65-69; GE2 at page 32. 
 
9 Tr. 69-70. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
garnished from his wages to pay this judgment, but he did not know how much is being 
garnished and how much is left to pay. He has not checked the status with his payroll 
department.10  
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.i is for a cell phone debt that he did not pay. He owes 
approximately $389 and the debt was incurred in 1994.11 
 
 Applicant stated he recently filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and was required to 
attend credit counseling. He has not sought or attended any other financial counseling. 
He hired a lawyer three weeks ago and paid $1,087 for the services. His mother loaned 
him the money and agreed to accept $100 a month in repayment once Applicant’s debts 
are discharged. Applicant has approximately $13,000 in student loans that are in a 
deferred status. He intends to start paying them in the spring. He stated that since 
completing school and working full time, he has been making progress toward 
improving his financial situation. He believes his negative financial situation was due to 
the transition after he was discharged from the military in 1999 and then later he 
divorced.12  
 
 Applicant believes he grosses approximately $34,000 a year. He stated his wife 
recently purchased a house. At the time of the purchase she was employed. She is 
currently looking for employment to resume working. Applicant listed his expenses and 
based on his monthly income, it appears his expenses exceed his income. He stated 
“we’re a little worried at this point.” They have been using a refund from his wife’s tax 
returns to help pay the bills while she has been unemployed after having their baby. 13 
 
 Applicant’s second level supervisor testified on his behalf. He testified Applicant 
is reliable, on time and “serves his purposes well.” He works well in a team 
environment.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
10 Tr. 40-43, 70-71. 
 
11 Tr. 71-74. 
 
12 Tr. 86-89, 94-95. 
 
13 Tr. 51-52, 74-86. 
 
14 Tr. 99-106. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
 
6 
 
 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has 
many debts that have been delinquent for a long time that remain unpaid. Applicant has 
been unable and unwilling to pay his delinquent debts. He has not taken action to pay 
even the smallest debts. The only debts that are being paid are because a judgment 
was obtained and his wages are being garnished. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the individual has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”) and (e) (“the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”). 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he has many delinquent debts that remain 
unpaid. Some of his delinquent debts are many years old and Applicant has not made 
any effort to resolve them. The delinquent debts that are being paid are being done so 
through garnishment and after judgments were obtained. Some of the debts are for 
small amounts, yet he has not made an effort to pay them. Applicant was going to 
school and experienced periods of unemployment, but there is no evidence he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. To the contrary, he has virtually ignored his debts, 
demonstrating his lack of good judgment. I find (a) and (b) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s plan for resolving his delinquent debts is to file for bankruptcy. He 
stated he recently hired a lawyer to assist him. He does not have a budget or a realistic 
plan for resolving his debts. At this juncture, he did not provide any documentation to 
support his actions and his debts remain a concern. The only financial counseling 
Applicant claimed he has had is what was mandated for his bankruptcy. Applicant has 
not made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He has actually shown little 
effort or initiative to resolve them. There are not clear indications the problem is being 
resolved. He has not contacted creditors with whom he disputes certain debts. He 
disputes a debt with a former landlord and claims he did not know about it and was not 
contacted; however he admits he never provided a forwarding address. Regarding other 
 
7 
 
 
disputed debts, he has not contacted the creditors or made any efforts to resolve the 
debts. He did not provide any documentation to support his assertions that he is 
disputing them. Applicant did provide some information that he is paying his child 
support, but admitted he is in arrears. Some of Applicant’s debts are being paid through 
garnishment, but he does not know the current balances remaining. Applicant has 
ignored his financial responsibilities. I find (c), (d), and (e) do not apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has numerous delinquent 
debts that have been unpaid for years. He experienced some periods of unemployment 
and went through a divorce, but years have passed and he continues to ignore his 
responsibilities to his creditors. Even after becoming aware in March 2008 that these 
issues were security concerns, he did not take action to pay even the smallest debt. 
Although he stated he is filing bankruptcy to discharge his debts, it appears these 
actions were only taken in the past few weeks. Applicant has been irresponsible in his 
finances and has not provided any indication that he has changed his behavior. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
