1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------, ---------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15663
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has substantial delinquent debt that he only recently began to repay.
He had alcohol-related convictions in 1994, 2000, and 2004, and continues to consume
alcohol. Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on February 28, 2007. On April 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guidelines F and G. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 21, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing on May 5, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 20, 2008, and DOHA assigned
the case to me on June 26, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 8, 2008, and Applicant acknowledged
receiving it at least 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 11-12.) Although DOHA has not
yet received his signed receipt for the notice of hearing that was to be delivered through
his company’s facility security officer, he received a copy of the notice via electronic
mail on July 8, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 31, 2008.
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I granted
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until August 14, 2008, in order for him to
submit additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August
12, 2008. On that same date, Applicant submitted additional documents to Department
Counsel. He did not submit any further evidence, and Department Counsel forwarded
Applicant’s submission without objection to its consideration on August 15, 2008. These
documents were marked AE C, and the record was closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where he has worked
for two and a half years. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR
¶¶ 1.a through 1.m, and 2.a through 2.d. Those admissions are incorporated in the
following findings. 
Although he has been continuously employed since at least February 2000, he
admittedly incurred 11 delinquent medical debts, totaling $15,327, and two other
delinquent debts totaling $3,056, during that period. (Answer to SOR ¶¶ 1.a through
1.m; Tr. at 44-56, 74-75.) On June 5, 2008, he paid the $825 medical debt that became
delinquent in March 2007, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a,. (AE A at 3; Tr. at 44-46.) He
disputed owing the $8,728 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. He claimed, without
corroborating documentation, that it represented an official business credit card from a
former employer that he had used for expenses that should have been reimbursed by
that employer. He has not contacted either the creditor or the former employer to
attempt resolution of this matter, however. (Answer to SOR at 3; Tr. at 56.) On June 25,
2007, he paid the $419 deficiency, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o, that gave rise to the tax lien
filed against him in June 2005. On August 8, 2008, he settled the $556 delinquent
telephone debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, for $400. (Answer to SOR at 4; AE A at 4, 5; AE
C at 3, 4; Tr. at 57.)
On July 30, 2008, Applicant entered into an agreement with a debt collection
agency that covered ten delinquent medical debts, totaling $11,790. This agreement
covers the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j, and an $84 debt that was not listed
in the SOR. The agreement called for him to make a $100 payment on July 30, for
3
which he provided a receipt, and another $100 payment on August 8, 2008, followed by
$200 payments every two weeks. This plan includes a total of 59 payments, the final of
which will be due on October 29, 2010. This plan does not cover the $2,799 medical
debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, which remains unresolved. (AE A at 1-2, 7-9; Tr. at 46-54,
71-73.)
Applicant provided a personal financial statement in January 2008 showing
monthly income of $5,287 and monthly expenses of $4,385 (he erroneously counted his
mortgage payment twice on the form). At the hearing, he provided another financial
statement for July 2008, showing $3,259 in net income and $2,662 in expenses. The
reduced income resulted because his fiancée quit her job at an insurance company and
started selling insurance on her own. The reduced expenses reflected lower utility costs
in the summer, lower daycare costs since his fiancée works from their home, and final
payment on one of his vehicle loans. Neither statement reflected the $400 monthly
payments called for in the debt repayment plan, but both reflected a sufficient surplus to
cover them. The delinquent debts that remain unresolved all arose between 2001 and
2005, with most of them from 2002. He is not presently incurring additional debt, and
the family has some savings. Applicant’s home is worth about $78,000, with a $54,000
balance due on the mortgage. (GE 6 at I-6; AE A at 1; Tr. at 79-84.)
Applicant also admitted the truth of all the alcohol consumption allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.d. He has consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point
of intoxication, since 1994 and continues to do so. He was arrested for driving under the
influence of alcohol (DUI) in November 2000 and February 2004, and convicted of both
offenses. He was also arrested and convicted in 1994 for illegal possession of alcohol
when he was 18 years old. After his second DUI conviction, he completed a one-year
outpatient alcohol treatment program. (GE 4; AE B; Tr. at 57-66, 70-71, 76-78.)
Applicant submitted letters from his fiancée, current and former managers, and a friend,
all of whom attested to his good character and work performance. (AE C at 5, 6, 10, 11.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances: “(a) inability or
5
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
(Tr. at 86.)
Applicant has at least an eight-year history of failing to satisfy legitimate financial
obligations, both large and small. He made one $100 payment, under a 27-month plan
he just entered into to pay off $11,790 in delinquent medical debts, and showed no
progress toward resolving three other bad debts totaling $14,027. He did resolve three
of the SOR-listed debts totaling $1,800. All of these debts became delinquent during a
period when Applicant was continuously employed, and his present financial
circumstances do not indicate an ability to resolve them in the near term. Substantial
security concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The five
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented roof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose during the last eight years, and a substantial
number and amount remain delinquent at present. His family budget is such that he
does not have the means to repay them, and he will have less money available to repay
those debts when winter utility bills increase. A large portion of his more than $25,700 in
delinquent debts are medical bills, but he provided no evidence that these arose from
unexpected medical emergencies. Applicant offered no evidence that he either sought
or followed financial counseling, or that he has any comprehensive plan to address
more than half of his debt. He has not contacted some of his creditors to arrange
repayments despite statements of intent to do so. He said that he disputes the amount
6
claimed on his $8,728 credit card debt, but has not followed through with the creditor or
his former employer about that liability. There is insufficient indication in this record that
his financial issues are either under control or likely to improve in the foreseeable future.
The Appeal Board explained the analysis applicable to determining whether an
applicant has mitigated financial concerns arising from delinquent debt as follows:
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a)(“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant repaid three debts
worth $1,800, but has paid only $100 toward $11,790 in medical debts and has done
nothing about three other debts totaling over $14,000. He demonstrated some progress
and the beginning of a program to reduce his debts over the next several years. This is
a good start, but it is too early in the process to find substantial mitigation under AG ¶¶
20(a) through (e). 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions asserted by the Government in
this case are: “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
7
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;” and, although not specifically mentioned by Department Counsel
during the hearing, “(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent.”
Applicant admitted to consuming alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of
intoxication from approximately 1994 until at least August 2006, in his answer to the
SOR, and he continues to consume alcohol. He committed DUI offenses in 2000 and
2004, and illegal possession of alcohol when he was 18 years old. The Government has
established security concerns under this guideline, shifting the burden of proof to
Applicant to mitigate those concerns.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant did not establish mitigation under ¶ 23(a). His three alcohol-related
offenses occurred over a span of ten years, with the most recent only four years ago.
He did not show that such conduct is unlikely to recur, or that it no longer casts doubt on
his reliability and judgment. He successfully completed a treatment program after his
2004 DUI, without further documented alcohol-related incidents. There is no evidence of
anything but moderate alcohol use since he completed that program. These matters
generate some mitigation of alcohol consumption security concerns under ¶¶ 23(b) and
23(d), although no favorable prognosis by a duly qualified person was provided.
8
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves substantial delinquent debts that he has only recently started to repay,
and a lengthy history of both financial irresponsibility and alcohol-related incidents of
various types and degrees of seriousness. Applicant is a mature, experienced adult who
is accountable for his decisions and conduct. All incidents of security concern, except
the 1994 illegal possession of alcohol, arose after he was 25 years old. 
Applicant’s debts arose over a lengthy period, and persist to date. There is
ongoing potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains
financially overextended. He completed a one-year alcohol treatment program several
years ago, in connection with his 2004 DUI offense, and has no alcohol-related
incidents since then. Both his recent debt repayment efforts and moderation of alcohol
use are substantial steps in the right direction toward rehabilitation, but insufficient time
has passed to support a present conclusion that legitimate security concerns are fully
mitigated. It is premature to determine that his rehabilitation and behavioral changes are
permanent, or that recurrence of financial or alcohol-related irresponsibility is unlikely.
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his failure to satisfy debts, history of not
meeting financial obligations, and pattern of alcohol-related incidents. Overall, the
record evidence leaves substantial doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and alcohol
consumption. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:            AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                                  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c:                                   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
