 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18559 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from his dual 
citizenship with Ghana and the United States, and his relationship and contacts with 
Ghanaian citizens. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 29, 2005. On May 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1  
 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on May 30, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 9, 2008. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on August 4, 2008. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection.2 Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented 
one witness and five exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection.3 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 
12, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
The Government elected not to pursue the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f (Tr. 87). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations, except for SOR ¶ 
1.f, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old research analyst working for a defense contractor. He 
has never been married and has no children. He was born in Ghana to a Ghanaian 
father and an American mother. His 70-year-old father is a resident and citizen of 
Ghana. He was educated in England and the United States. While in the United States, 
his father married his mother. Applicant’s mother is a native U.S. citizen. After he 
finished his education, Applicant’s parents moved to Ghana. Applicant and his siblings 
were born and raised in Ghana. As a child, he travelled with his mother to the United 
States almost every year to visit his mother’s family. He completed third grade, part of 
fourth grade, and eighth grade in U.S. schools (Tr. 74). In 1986, at age 14, Applicant’s 
mother, and her three children moved to the United States. Applicant finished his last 
three years of high school in the United States. 
 
From 1988 to 1993, he attended a U.S. university, and received a Bachelor’s 
degree in African Studies and French. He completed his Master’s degree in Economics 
in 1996, and received his Ph.D. in International Economics in 2004 both at U.S. 
universities. In 2004, Applicant was hired by his current employer, a defense contractor, 
as a research analyst. During the last four years, he has impressed his supervisors and 
colleagues with his candor, honesty, and integrity. Applicant is considered to be a 
valued employee and an outstanding researcher. He displays high ethical and moral 
standards. In his references’ opinion, Applicant is a loyal American citizen who poses no 
risk to the interests of the United States. They recommended Applicant for a security 
2  GE 4 was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
3  AE 11 was timely submitted post-hearing. I kept the record open to allow Applicant time to 
submit additional documentation. Department Counsel’s memorandum, stating no objections to me 
considering Applicant’s post-hearing submission is included in AE 11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                     
clearance without reservations. There is no evidence he has ever compromised 
classified information or that he has failed to follow the rules for handling classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s father is a lawyer by profession who transitioned into Ghana’s political 
arena (Tr. 13, Answer to the SOR). For over 21 years, he has served in high and 
sensitive Government positions in the Ghanaian government.4 During the last 15 years, 
Applicant’s father served in Ghana’s National Democratic Congress. He recently 
resigned his position in the National Democratic Congress and formed a new political 
party, in which he holds a preeminent position. Applicant’s father is considered an 
upstanding politician and a well-respected individual. Applicant is very proud of his 
father and recognizes he could not fill in his shoes (Tr. 39).  
 
Since his arrival to the United States, Applicant has travelled to Ghana four 
times, two times in 2007, once in 2005, and once in 1997 (Tr. 26, 42, Answer). He 
travelled to Ghana to visit with his father, family, and friends. Whenever he travelled to 
Ghana, Applicant would visit with his family for 30 to 60 days. Applicant has telephonic 
contact with his father at least once a month (Tr. 39). He has personal contact with him 
approximately once every two years when either Applicant travels to Ghana or his father 
travels to the United States. His father travels to the United States to visit his wife and 
children, and to pick up medications. Applicant has minimal contact with his father 
because his father is not a communicative person and is always busy with politics (Tr. 
41). Applicant’s father has six siblings living in Ghana, four brothers and two sisters. 
Applicant’s contact with his extended family is infrequent - limited to personal contact 
when he travels to Ghana, or the occasional holiday telephone calls. 
 
Applicant maintains contact with a Ghanaian cousin and a high school friend both 
of whom are residents and citizens of Ghana (Tr. 42). His cousin is an Information 
Technology technician working for a private company. Applicant reestablished contact 
with his cousin during his 2005 trip to Ghana. Upon his return to the United States, 
Applicant continued his contact with his cousin exchanging e-mails approximately once 
a month. Lately, his contact has diminished to an exchange of e-mails once or twice a 
year. Applicant’s contact with his Ghanaian friend is limited to infrequent e-mails and 
telephone call.  
 
Applicant’s mother is a native U.S. citizen, raised, and educated in the United 
States. She met and married Applicant’s father during college. After their marriage, they 
moved to Ghana where he worked as a teacher. In 1986, his mother, Applicant, and two 
siblings moved back to the United States. Applicant’s father provided financial support 
for his family in the United States including paying for housing and college expenses 
(Tr. 61).  
 
4  The Government positions held by Applicant’s father, as well as his tenure in those positions 
have been withheld to protect Applicant’s privacy. That information is available in GE 1, GE 2, and the 
transcript.  
 
4 
 
 
                                                     
Applicant’s siblings were also born in Ghana. They are dual Ghanaian and U.S. 
citizens by birth. Both siblings are married to U.S. citizens and they consider themselves 
U.S. citizens (Tr. 75). His brother served honorably in the U.S. Army for three years. He 
was stationed in Korea during his term of service. His permanent residence is in the 
United States. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be a U.S. citizen by birthright (Tr. 36). He has no 
property or any financial interests in Ghana. He never registered to vote in Ghana, and 
has not participated in any elections in that country. There is no evidence to show that 
Applicant has ever exercised any of the rights and privileges reserved for Ghanaian 
citizens since moving to the United States. He testified he never discusses his work or 
any matter related to his employment, terrorism, or U.S. national security with any 
members of his family.  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Ghana is a constitutional 
democracy with a developing economy. The present government was created in 1993, 
and since then, there have been several peaceful, democratic transfers of governmental 
powers. The government of Ghana generally respects human rights and continues to 
make improvements in its human rights practices. The United States and Ghana 
enjoyed good relations maintained through educational and scientific institutions and 
cultural links. The U.S. and Ghanaian militaries have cooperated in numerous military 
exercises. The United States is among Ghana’s principal trading partners. In 2007, the 
United States provided $55 million in developmental assistance to Ghana. There is no 
evidence to show Ghana conducts economic, financial, or intelligence espionage 
against the United States, that it supports terrorist organizations, or that it has inimical 
interests to the United States. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.5 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
5  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”6 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
6  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.7  
 
Applicant’s father’s history of working for the Ghanaian government in sensitive 
positions, and his contribution to the forming of a new political party, raise security 
concerns. Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or 
obligation with his father. The closeness of the relationship between him and his father 
is shown to some extent by his personal and telephone contacts with his father; his 
pride and respect for his father’s accomplishments; and the financial assistance 
provided by his father to Applicant’s mother, Applicant, and his siblings. These contacts 
create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the 
possibility that Ghanaian agents or terrorists may exploit the opportunity to obtain 
information about the United States. His connection to his father’s family members also 
creates a potential conflict of interest because his relationship is sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern about his desire to help his extended family by providing 
sensitive or classified information.  
 
 
7  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  Two Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that Applicant’s favorable information is sufficient to mitigate the Foreign 
Influence security concerns.  
 
Applicant’s close relationship with his father and his extended family in Ghana 
creates a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. However, in light of Ghana’s 
history and current diplomatic and economic relationship with the United States, I do not 
believe Applicant’s contact with his father, and his father’s family members in Ghana, 
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. Available information suggests Ghana’s government does not have a history 
of targeting American citizens to obtain U.S. information. Ghana and the United States 
have diplomatic and economic relations, and the United States is currently assisting 
Ghana with millions of dollars in economic and technical aid. Also, there is no evidence 
Ghana’s government has ever collected or is collecting U.S. military, economic, or 
technical information. Under the circumstances of this case, it is unlikely that Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual or government and the U.S. interests. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United States for approximately 
22 years, during which he finished high school, attended college, and higher education. 
Applicant’s mother and two siblings live in the United States. All of his financial and 
business interests are in the United States. Applicant has established himself as a 
proud American citizen and a successful professional. He has worked for a U.S. 
 
8 
 
 
contractor for four years and has established a track record as an outstanding 
researcher. He displays high ethical and moral standards. Applicant is a loyal American 
citizen who poses no risk to the interests of the United States. His references 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance without reservations. There is no 
evidence he ever compromised classified information or that he has failed to follow the 
rules for handling classified information. 
 
Applicant has had infrequent contact or communication with most of his 
Ghanaian relatives since he left Ghana in 1986. He has maintained some contact with a 
cousin and a childhood friend. Overall, I find Applicant’s contact with his extended family 
members is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a 
risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Considering the record evidence as a whole, AG 
¶¶ 8a, (b) and (c) apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant credibly averred his loyalty to the United States, his desire to help the 
United States, and his desire to live only in the United States. Applicant has lived in the 
United States for close to 22 years. He finished high school and obtained his college 
and higher education degrees in the United States. Since then, he has been a 
productive member of the American society and worked diligently for a government 
contractor. Applicant has travelled to Ghana only four times since 1986 and has casual 
and infrequent contact with extended family members in Ghana. His mother and his two 
siblings (and their families) are residents and citizens of the United States. Applicant 
clearly has feelings of affection and or obligation towards his father. I do not believe, 
however, that Applicant’s feelings are such that they create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation. As discussed above, Ghana’s government does not have a history of 
targeting American citizens to obtain U.S. information, and there is no evidence 
 
9 
 
 
Ghana’s government has ever collected or is collecting U.S. military, economic, or 
technical information. Ghana and the United States have diplomatic and economic 
relations, and the United States is currently assisting Ghana with millions of dollars in 
economic and technical aid. Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant has 
no divided loyalties, and it is not likely he will be vulnerable to pressure, coercion by any 
foreign government. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
