 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13116 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence), based on Applicant’s family ties to Iran and Sweden. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on May 15, 2007. 
On April 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 24, 2008; answered it on 
May 12, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received 
the request on May 15, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 31, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me on June 13, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 29, 2008, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were admitted without objection. I granted Department 
Counsel’s request to keep the record open until September 2, 2008, to submit additional 
materials pertaining the Sweden. Department Counsel timely submitted his additional 
materials to support a request for administrative notice, discussed below. The record 
closed on September 2, 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 3, 
2008. 
 
Amendment of the SOR 
 
 After both sides had presented their evidence, Department Counsel moved to 
amend SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e to conform to the evidence. Applicant did not object, and I 
granted the motion (Tr. 77-78). SOR ¶ 1.a originally alleged Applicant’s wife is a citizen 
of Sweden, and it was amended to allege she is a dual citizen of Sweden and Iran. SOR 
¶ 1.e originally alleged his mother-in-law is a dual citizen of Iran and Sweden, and it was 
amended to allege his mother-in-law and father-in-law are dual citizens of Iran and 
Sweden. The amendments are hand-written on the SOR. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iran and Sweden (Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II). I took administrative notice as 
requested by Department Counsel, with no objection by Applicant. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old senior systems integration/test engineer for a defense 
contractor. He has held a clearance since January 1996 (Tr. 5; GX 1 at 9). He worked 
for another federal contractor from December 1995 to May 2001. He worked for two 
private employers who were not federal contactors and had two periods of 
unemployment until he was hired for his current position. He has worked for his current 
employer since March 2006. His current supervisor for the past three years describes 
him as a quick learner, technically proficient, willing to help others, and very 
conscientious (AX B). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. He came to the U.S. in 1976 at age 16 (GX 4 at 1). 
He received his high school diploma in 1977 and registered with the Selective Service in 
January 1983 (AX C). He obtained a bachelor of computer science degree from a U.S. 
university in May 1985, and a master’s degree in May 1988. He became a U.S. citizen 
in July 1995. 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iran. They brought him to the 
U.S. and then returned to Iran, leaving Applicant behind to live with his brother (Tr. 47). 
They returned to the U.S. and became permanent residents of the U.S. in 1996 (AX D). 
They both applied for U.S. citizenship in 2001, but their applications were rejected 
because they had difficulty understanding English (Tr. 40-41; AX A at 2).  
 
 Applicant’s father is 95 years old and a retired medical doctor who had a private 
practice in Iran. He became seriously ill in December 2001 and returned to Iran because 
of the high cost of medical care in the U.S. He has heart disease, and he is blind in one 
eye and hard of hearing (AX A at 1). Applicant’s mother is 86 years old and has never 
worked outside the home. She was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in February 
2008 and has limited mobility as a result of breaking her hip in 2002. His parents know 
he works with computers, but they do not know who he works for or that he has a 
security clearance (Tr. 41-42; GX 3 at 2; AX A at 1). 
 
Applicant talks to his parents by telephone about once a month, but 
communication is difficult because of their age and infirmities. His mother no longer 
recognizes him (Tr. 64). His parents own a home in Iran, but Applicant and his brothers 
will be unable to inherit it because they would be required to travel to Iran and 
personally claim their inheritance. Applicant believes the home probably will taken by 
the Iranian government (Tr. 59). 
 
 Applicant’s older brother came to the U.S. in 1974 and earned a master’s degree 
and a doctorate. He became a U.S. citizen in December 2000 (Tr. 43; AX A at 2). He 
currently resides in Canada and is a professor at a Canadian university (Tr. 53).  
 
Applicant’s younger brother also came to the U.S. in 1974. He obtained a 
master’s degree in 1979, is married to a U.S. citizen, has two sons who are U.S. 
citizens, and is employed by a state government (Tr. 43-44) AX A at 2). He became a 
U.S. citizen in May 1991.  
 
Applicant’s sister was born in Iran. She moved to Spain in the early 1980s. 
Applicant had no contact with his sister after she moved to Spain and does not know 
her current whereabouts (GX 4 at 2). 
 
 Applicant’s wife and her parents were born in Iran, moved to Sweden in 1980, 
and now are citizens of Sweden. Applicant and his wife met in December 2003, after 
she came to the U.S., and they were married in June 2005. She is a permanent resident 
of the U.S. (AX E). All her relatives live either in the U.S. or in Sweden (Tr. 45). 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s wife intends to become a U.S. citizen as soon as she is eligible (Tr. 72). 
They have a son, born in December 2006. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a computer salesman and his mother-in-law works for 
a sign company. Neither is connected to the governments of Sweden or Iran (GX 4 at 
2). 
 
 Applicant traveled to Iran in 1999 to visit his father, who suddenly developed 
heart problems. He reported his travel to his security officer and used an Iranian 
passport. He traveled to Iran again in 2002 when his mother broke her hip. He was not 
working for the government or a government contractor when he made this trip (AX A at 
2). He destroyed his Iranian passport in February 2008 after being advised that it raised 
security concerns (GX 2 at 3). He is aware that he probably will be unable to visit his 
parents in Iran without an Iranian passport (Tr. 46-47). 
 
 Applicant has no financial interests in Iran (GX 4 at 2). He and his brother jointly 
own a rental property in the U.S. Applicant lives in another home owned by his brother 
and pays all the household expenses except the mortgage (Tr. 67-68). He has a 
retirement account worth about $35,000 and about $4,000 in savings (Tr. 68-69). He 
votes in U.S. elections (Tr. 70). 
 
I took administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts. Iran is a theocratic 
Islamic republic dominated by Shia Muslim clergy, with ultimate political authority vested 
in a learned religious scholar. Iran’s government is hostile to the U.S. Current U.S. 
concerns about Iran are based on its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and weapons 
of mass destruction; support for and involvement in international terrorism; support for 
violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its human rights abuses, 
including summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and restrictions on 
civil liberties.  Iran has provided guidance, training, and weapons to Shia political and 
militant groups in Iraq.  It also provides encouragement, training, funding, and weapons 
to anti-Israeli terrorist groups in its efforts to undermine the Arab-Israeli peace process, 
and it advocates the destruction of Israel. The U.S. has designated Iran as a state 
sponsor of terrorism. The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Iran in April 1980, 
prohibits most trade with Iran, and uses multilateral sanctions and diplomatic pressure 
to contain the threats posed by Iran. Because Iran does not recognize dual citizenship, 
Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely Iranian citizens by the 
Iranian authorities, and they are required to enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport. 
While traveling or residing in Iran, they are subject to surveillance, search, harassment, 
arrest, and imprisonment. 
 
I also took administrative notice that Sweden is a constitutional monarchy with a 
multiparty parliamentary government. The government generally respects the human 
rights of its citizens, and the law and judiciary provide effective redress for individual 
instances of abuse. Sweden was neutral in World War I, followed a policy of armed 
neutrality in World War II, and it currently remains nonaligned. In 2002, Sweden refined 
its foreign policy to allow non-alignment in peacetime with the ability to cooperate with 
 
5 
 
 
military alliances in peacekeeping and peace-building. Friendship and cooperation 
between the U.S. and Sweden is strong and close.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
6 
 
 
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR, as amended at the hearing, alleges Applicant’s spouse is a dual 
citizen of Sweden and Iran living in the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.a); his father and mother are 
citizens and residents of Iran (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and c); his two brothers are dual citizens of 
Iran and the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.d); his mother-in-law and father-in-law are dual citizens of 
Iran and Sweden (SOR ¶ 1.e); and he traveled to Iran in December 2002 and 
November 1999 (SOR ¶ 1.f). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Applicant’s travel to Iran was solely to visit his ailing parents. Except for his use 
of a foreign passport to enter and exit Iran, his foreign travel has no independent 
security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
 
7 
 
 
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A disqualifying condition 
also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). The totality of an applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. 
ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  
 
Iran’s hostility to the United States places a “very heavy burden of persuasion” on 
applicant to overcome the security concerns that are raised when an applicant has 
immediate family members living in Iran. See ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2006. With its adversarial stance and its poor human rights record, it is not 
unlikely that Iran would target any citizen in an attempt to gather information from the 
United States. I conclude AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) are raised by the presence of Applicant’s 
parents in Iran. 
 
 A security concern also may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). 
Applicant’s spouse and her parents were born in Iran and are considered to be Iranian 
citizens by that government, but they have no attachment to Iran and no family or 
financial ties to Iran. They are citizens of Sweden, a friendly country with a good human 
rights record. Applicant’s spouse aspires to be a U.S. citizen. I conclude Applicant’s 
relationships with his spouse and her parents do not create the “heightened risk” 
contemplated by AG ¶ 7(d). 
 
 Finally, a security concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, 
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-
operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). Applicant is resigned to the fact that he cannot 
inherit his parent’s home in Iran, and he did not appear particularly concerned about it at 
 
8 
 
 
the hearing. There is no “heightened risk” because Applicant is unconcerned about the 
property. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant cares about his parents, and it is not unlikely that Iran 
would target them in an attempt to gather information from the United States. I conclude 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s loyalty, affection, and sense of obligation toward his parents are not 
“minimal,” but his relationships and loyalties in the U.S. are strong. He came to the U.S. 
when he was 16 years old and has never lived under the current regime in Iran. He has 
lived in the U.S. for 32 years. He completed high school, college, and graduate school 
in the U.S. His two brothers have lived in the U.S. since 1974, were educated in the 
U.S., and have been U.S. citizens for many years. Applicant is devoted to his spouse 
and young son. His spouse aspires to be a U.S. citizen, and his son is a native-born 
citizen. He has held a clearance since 1996. His entire professional career has been in 
the U.S., and he has spent much of his career working as a contractor for the U.S. 
government. He made a conscious choice to destroy his Iranian passport, knowing that 
doing so made it virtually impossible for him to visit his aged and ailing parents again. 
His destruction of his Iranian passport demonstrated that he would resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the U.S. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is mature, well-educated, and intelligent. He was candid, sincere, and 
credible at the hearing. He has spent all his adult life in the U.S. But for his parents’ 
medical problems and the high cost of medical care in the U.S., he would have no 
family ties to Iran. But for their difficulty with the English language, his parents would be 
U.S. citizens. His family ties to Sweden do not raise significant security concerns. He 
has not told his parents the identity of his employer or that he holds a clearance. He has 
carefully thought about the conflict raised by the presence of his parents in Iran, and he 
has resolved it by destroying his passport and making it impossible for him to see his 
parents again.  
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
carried his “very heavy burden” and mitigated the security concerns based on foreign 
influence. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
