DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxxx Xxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 07-18050
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 9 April 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
H.  Applicant answered the SOR 27 May 2008, and requested a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 18 July 2008, and I convened a hearing 25 August 2008.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 4 September 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 27-year-old aero-mechanical
engineer employed by a defense contractor since February 2005. He has not previously
held a clearance.
Applicant used marijuana for about 10 years between 1997 and May 2007. Most
of his marijuana use occurred during his college years (1999-2004), but his marijuana
use continued after his graduation in May 2005. It continued after he had been hired by
his current employer in February 2005, despite the fact that company policy prohibited
all illegal drug use, and Applicant had been required to pass a drug screening as a
condition of employment. During his college years, Applicant contributed to the
purchase of marijuana at least once. He also experimented with hallucinogenic
mushrooms in the late 1990s, tried ketimine in 1999, cocaine in 2000, and LSD and
ecstasy in 2001. He was also arrested for marijuana possession in 1999, pled guilty,
and was sentenced to perform community service. However, he continued to use
marijuana after this arrest.
Applicant disclosed this drug history on a clearance application he executed in
August 2007 (G.E. 1). He disclosed essentially the same information during a October
2007 subject interview (G.E. 2).
Applicant stopped using marijuana in May 2007, because he knew that the
government would not allow him to have a clearance if he was using marijuana. Yet, he
knew that company policy also prohibited drug use, and he knew when he was hired
that he would eventually be required to obtain a clearance. He also cites his girlfriend
(soon-to-be-fiancé) of 2 ½ years as another reason for him to remain drug free. She
does not use marijuana, but is aware that Applicant has.
After graduation from college in May 2005, Applicant used marijuana in party
settings when it was offered to him. Since May 2007, he has been offered marijuana by
acquaintances at two different parties, but asserts—without corroboration—that he has
declined.
Applicant is a good employee (A.E. A). He has executed a formal drug statement
of intent as contemplated by the Directive (A.E. B).
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶25.(a) any drug abuse ; (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,3
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
¶ 26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that4
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment [Emphasis supplied];
¶ 26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug5
using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
3
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline H
(Drug Involvement).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H, by
demonstrating Applicant’s use and purchase of marijuana between 1999 and May
2007.  However, Applicant has only partially mitigated the security concerns. Regarding3
his experimental use of ecstasy, LSD, cocaine, ketimine, and hallucinogenic
mushrooms, he demonstrated that the use was under circumstances unlikely to recur,4
and further demonstrated intent to not abuse these drugs in the future.  While5
Applicant’s use of these drugs is fairly characterized as “recent,” this term has less
meaning under the new adjudicative criteria, where the corresponding language “the
behavior happened so long ago. . .” [¶ 26.(a)], is used in the disjunctive with language
that clearly applies to Applicant. In addition, his experimental drug abuse was
infrequent.
4
However, Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns over his marijuana
use. This use began before college, continued while he was in college, and continued
long past the point where he was aware of the potential consequences for his
employment and clearance. He continued marijuana use after 1999 despite his
marijuana possession. He continued despite company policy and his knowledge that a
clearance in his position would eventually be required. Unlike his experimental use of
drugs, Applicant use of marijuana was recent, not infrequent overall, and not under
unusual circumstances. He has not dissociated himself from drug using associates and
contacts, changed or avoided environments where drugs are used, or had an
appropriate period of abstinence. Without some corroboration of either his abstention or
his refusal of offered marijuana, I do not consider his year-plus abstinence from
marijuana use an appropriate period of abstinence. I have considered his signed
statement of intent to refrain from marijuana use. However, aside from this statement,
Applicant offers little in the way of changed circumstances that give credence to his
now-stated intent to refrain from marijuana use in the future. Accordingly, I resolve
Guideline H against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
Subparagraph g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
