                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-17390 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory M. Wade, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline H (drug 
involvement) but not under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 8 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated May 8, 2008). GE 8 is the 
source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and H (drug involvement). The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his 
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 4, 2008, and elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing (Government Exhibit (GE) 9). Department 
Counsel requested a hearing (Transcript (Tr.) 9). At the hearing held on August 28, 
2008, Department Counsel offered nine exhibits (GEs 1-5) (Tr. 14-16), and Applicant 
offered nine exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A1-A11) (Tr. 34-35). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GE 1-5 and AE A1-A11 (Tr. 16, 35-36). I received the 
transcript on September 8, 2008.   
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of the SOR’s allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 28 years old (Tr. 31).4 He graduated from high school in 1998, and 
attended college, majoring in engineering and business (Tr. 32). However, he did not 
graduate (Tr. 32). Eventually, he intends to obtain a mechanical engineering degree (Tr. 
33). On November 11, 2001, his father committed suicide, and Applicant increased his 
drug use (Tr. 33). After 2001 his depression gradually decreased; however, he remains 
on medication for depression (Tr. 33-34). He is currently “emotionally stable” (Tr. 43, 
A5). Although Applicant was fired twice (in May 2001 and July 2001), he did not 
disclose these terminations when he applied for his current employment because he did 
not think there was enough room on his employment application, and did not think it 
was relevant because he was fired from part-time jobs (Tr. 53-54). Moreover, the 
terminations back in 2001 were not that recent (Tr. 54). He does not currently hold a 
security clearance (Tr. 57). He does not have any prior military service. 
 
 
 
 
 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. GEs 2 and 3 (Responses to Interrogatories) and 9 (Response 
to SOR) are the sources for the facts in this section unless stated otherwise.   
  
4GE 1 (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated Jan. 9, 2007, will be 
referred to as a security clearance application in this decision). GE 1 is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph, and the next paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication two to three times each 
month from about 1997 to about February 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a, Tr. 46). He was charged 
with underage possession of alcohol in 1998, fined and ordered to complete community 
service (SOR ¶ 1.b). His parents suggested to Applicant in the late 1990s that he had 
an alcohol problem and should seek alcohol counseling (SOR ¶ 1.c, Tr. 50). In May 
2001, he was terminated from employment for bringing a 12 pack of beer to work (SOR 
¶ 1.d, Tr. 46, 55). He drank alcohol at work, but thought alcohol possession and 
consumption at work was allowed (Tr. 55).  
 
The police arrested Applicant in May 2003 and authorities charged him with 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) (Tr. 40). The breath alcohol tests conducted 
by the police were at .24 and .18 (Tr. 58, GE 3 at 6). Applicant claimed he drank two 
shots (one of tequila and one of Jaegemeister), two beers and two mixed drinks over 
about a five hour period (Tr. 60, GE 3 at 6). The last four drinks were within about 90 
minutes of leaving the bar (Tr. 61; GE 3 at 6). The court found him guilty and sentenced 
him to jail for six months (suspended) attendance at Alcohol Safety Action Program 
(ASAP), three years of probation, and a one year restriction on his driver’s license (SOR 
¶ 1.e). He completed ASAP (Tr. 41). However, he mistakenly said he did not have any 
alcohol counseling (Tr. 53, Compare GE 1 at § 25 with GE 1 at § 23). He has not had 
any alcohol-related offenses after his 2003 DUI (Tr. 41). His father had an alcohol 
problem, and Applicant did not want to repeat his father’s mistakes with alcohol (Tr. 51). 
He did not get into any fights because of alcohol, and alcohol consumption did not 
adversely affect his finances (Tr. 52). Before his May 2003 DUI, he occasionally drove 
while under the influence of alcohol, but after his 2003 DUI he stopped drinking alcohol 
and then driving (Tr. 63).   
 
 Applicant drank three or four beers one to three times a week from the age of 19, 
until he obtained his current employment in November 2006 (Tr. 47). Applicant does not 
currently drink alcohol on a daily basis, but he does consume alcohol on weekends (Tr. 
39).  He usually drinks on Friday or Saturday, usually at a concert or gathering of friends 
(Tr. 40).  He drinks about four or five beers, but does not drive after drinking (Tr. 40).5 It 
takes about four beers for Applicant to become intoxicated (Tr. 47).  He currently drinks 
to intoxication perhaps twice a month (Tr. 48).  
 
Applicant occasionally drinks more than six or seven beers (Tr. 48). The most 
recent time was a month before his hearing when he was vacationing with friends at the 
beach (Tr. 49). During the week at the beach, he consumed alcohol on about four nights 
(Tr. 49).  On each night, he drank about six beers and one or two shots (Tr. 50). He did 
not drive after drinking alcohol (Tr. 50). He continues to consume alcohol to intoxication 
because he “I’m adult enough to handle it in a responsible manner” (Tr. 57). He 
describes his alcohol consumption as moderate (Tr. 39). 
 
5 Applicant told the OPM investigator on February 9, 2007, “since his DUI [he] is very careful to 
not drink more than 1 or 2 drinks when he is at a social club or social gathering. If he does drink more 
than two alcohol drinks while out he gets a ride home from someone.” (GE 3 at 6).  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Applicant used marijuana approximately 50 times from approximately August 
1997 to about August 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a, Tr. 45, GE 1 at § 24). He purchased marijuana 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). His employer terminated his employment in July 2001 because his drug 
test came back positive for the presence of the marijuana metabolite (SOR ¶ 1.c, Tr. 45-
46). He used cocaine at least five times from about June 2001 to about March 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.d, Tr. 45, GE 1 at § 24). He used mushrooms three times from about January 
2004 to September 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e, Tr. 45, GE 1 at § 24).  He has never sold illegal 
drugs (Tr. 41). He has never been arrested or convicted of a drug offense (Tr. 61). He 
passed a drug test on August 11, 2003 (A4). The only source of information about his 
drug use came from Applicant’s disclosures (Tr. 62).  
 
 An Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant on 
February 9, 2007 (Tr. 24, 28; GE 3). The interview (GE 3) accurately reflects what 
Applicant told the OPM investigator (Tr. 26). His statement to the OPM investigator was 
consistent with his statement at his hearing.  
 
On November 28, 2006, he started working at his current job (Tr. 34). He passed 
his drug test when he started this job in 2006 (Tr. 34, 37, A3). He has remained drug 
free after starting his employment in November 2006 (Tr. 37). He does not plan to use 
drugs in the future (Tr. 41). His current employment is to design ductwork for heating 
and ventilations systems (Tr. 38). He loves his current employment (Tr. 39). He plans to 
marry, have a good career, and purchase a house (Tr. 41, 44). He recognizes that 
accomplishing these goals is not compatible with drug abuse (Tr. 41, 44).  
 
Applicant’s primary physician for the last ten years indicates he has no history of 
alcohol or drug addiction, and is not addicted to illegal drugs today (Tr. 42-43, A5). He 
ended his association with his drug-using friends and associates (Tr. 43-44). However, 
he meets his drug-using associates four or five times per year “in passing” (Tr. 56). He 
avoids the locations where drug abusers congregate (Tr. 44). The four persons who 
rented the beach house with Applicant a month before his hearing included marijuana 
user(s) (Tr. 62). He offered to sign a statement of automatic revocation of his clearance 
for any violation of drug laws (Tr. 44). 
 
Recommendations  
 
Applicant’s supervisors, friends and co-workers at his current employment 
provided six letters supporting reinstatement of his clearance (A6, A7, A8, A9, A10, 
A11). Those letters describe Applicant as a valuable member of the firm with a solid 
work ethic and integrity. His contributions to his company have been numerous and 
valuable. His work is good and accurate. He is a dedicated, trustworthy, bright, 
intelligent, talented, competent and honest employee. He volunteers in the community. 
Applicant is a professional, who is eager to show initiative and improve himself. 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must 
consider Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are 
used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply 
these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process 
provision in Section E2.2, Enclosure 2, of the Directive. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
 
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that the issuance of the 
clearance is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.6 The government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 
provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” The burden of disproving a mitigating 
condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
6 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7‟The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, [evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a 
relationship that transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours 
as well. It is because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose 
a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise 
of classified information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.”  See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and H (drug involvement) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 
Directive, and [decides] whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
AG ¶¶ 22(d) to 22(g) do not apply. A qualified medical professional or licensed 
clinical social worker did not determine Applicant had an alcohol abuse or dependence 
problem. He did not have a relapse after completion of an alcohol rehabilitation 
program. Binge drinking is not defined in the Directive and is not established. Although 
he received an alcohol evaluation from a physician, and the diagnosis ruled out drug 
dependence, it did not rule out or address alcohol abuse. Although he received 
counseling in an “alcohol rehabilitation program,” he did not subsequently have a 
relapse because the program did not result in advice to abstain from alcohol 
consumption. No court orders concerning alcohol use or treatment were violated.  
AG ¶ 22(a) applies because Applicant was convicted of DUI in May 2003. AG ¶ 
22(b) applies because he was fired for bringing a 12-pack of beer to work.  AG ¶ 22(c) 
applies because he habitually consumes alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.  
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
AG ¶ 23(a) applies in part because Applicant only had two documented alcohol-
related incidents that had an adverse effect on his life (the 2001 termination and the 
2003 DUI). These two events considered in isolation are somewhat infrequent or 
isolated, and not recent. He does not drink alcohol and drive, and accordingly, “it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 
23(a), cannot be fully applied because he continues to consume alcohol to intoxication. 
Additionally, he admitted committing other DUIs before the 2003 arrest that were not 
detected by law enforcement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23(b) to 23(d) do not fully apply. Applicant did not acknowledge being 
alcohol dependent or having an alcohol abuse problem. Although he completed an 
alcohol abuse treatment program, he did not attend any Alcoholics Anonymous 
treatment program. He continues to consume alcohol to intoxication and does not 
recognize that drinking alcohol to intoxication, after his previous alcohol-related 
problems raises security concerns.  Applicant’s counsel argued that continued alcohol 
consumption to intoxication showed a “pattern . . . of responsible use” because he did 
not drive after consuming alcohol.  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of more substantial 
alcohol abuse than Applicant’s that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).  In a 
case more factually similar to Applicant’s case the Appeal Board listed the following 
pertinent facts: 
 
In August 2004, Applicant was charged with Driving While Intoxicated 
(DWI) after having consumed between 12 and 24 cans of beer at a social 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
function. His breathalyzer results were .223, the legal limit for alcohol 
being .08. He pled guilty and was sentenced to a fine and to perform 
community service. He was required to attend a “substance abuse traffic 
offender program.” Applicant’s dates of attendance were January through 
February 2005. Additionally, he was placed on probation for two years, 
which was set to expire in December 2006. Applicant has continued 
drinking after completion of this program. He became intoxicated on 
Memorial Day 2006 and again the following July, when he consumed 12 to 
18 beers. Applicant stated at the hearing that he intends to continue 
drinking but will avoid becoming intoxicated. 
 
ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) (reversing administrative 
judge’s grant of a clearance and noting, “That Applicant continued to drink even after his 
second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”).   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to AB where AB had several 
alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 2000, six years 
before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his alcohol 
consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol 
consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and 
capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) 
(involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and 
reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
After carefully consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, I conclude his continued alcohol consumption to intoxication after receipt 
of SOR ¶ 1.a, which states, “You consumed alcohol, to the point of intoxication two to 
three times each month. . . ” shows he is unwilling or unable to curtail his alcohol 
consumption. As such, his conduct demonstrates a lack of judgment and/or a failure to 
control impulses which is inconsistent with the holder of a security clearance.     
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug8 involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
8AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
 
(a) any drug abuse;9  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,” “testing positive for illegal drug 
use,” and “illegal drug possession.”  AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b) and 25(c) apply. The other 
disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. These disqualifying 
conditions apply because Applicant used marijuana, cocaine, and mushrooms. He 
possessed these drugs before he used them. He tested positive in 2001 on a drug test 
for the marijuana metabolite, and was fired for drug use. 
 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substances. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 
545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). Mushrooms are the street name for 
psilocybin or psilocin, which is a Schedule (Sch.) I Controlled Substance. See United States v. Hussein, 
351 F.3d 9, 16 (1st Cir. 2003) (mushrooms are a plant which may contain the Schedule I(c)(15) and 
I(c)(16) controlled substance psilocybin or psilocyn). Cocaine is a Schedule II Controlled Substance. See 
Sch. II(a)(4) (cocaine).   
 
9AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”  ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”10 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant’s last drug use was about two years ago in August 2006. AG ¶ 26(a) 
fully applies despite Applicant’s last illegal drug use being relatively recent. His overall 
illegal drug use lasted approximately nine years (1997 to 2006), and involved numerous 
uses of marijuana, brief use of mushrooms in 2004, and five cocaine uses.11 AG ¶ 26(a) 
applies because his past drug use does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Because of his abstention from drug use for about 
two years, and his recognition of the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse, there is 
reasonable certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. I am reasonably 
confident his illegal drug possession and use will not recur. Because he will not use 
illegal drugs in the future and is subject to drug testing at his employment, confidence in 
his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment with respect to drug use is 
restored.   
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has somewhat disassociated from his drug-using 
associates and contacts. He does not routinely return to locations where he abused 
illegal drugs, and has changed or avoided the environment where drugs were used. 
After breaking his patterns of drug abuse, he has changed his life, and has not routinely 
associated with the drug abusing friends from his past. He has abstained from drug 
abuse for about two years. Moreover, he offered to provide “a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. The marijuana, cocaine and mushrooms were never prescribed for 
him. He did not satisfactorily complete a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements.  
 
                                                                                                                                             
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
11In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in August 2006, about two years 
ago. The motivations to stop using drugs are evident.12 He understands the adverse 
results from drug abuse. He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no 
drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified 
information.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
There is considerable evidence supporting approval of his clearance. Applicant 
revealed his drug abuse on his security clearance application, to an OPM investigator 
on June 20, 2007, and at his hearing. Applicant used illegal drugs from 1997 to 2006. 
He does not routinely associate with his drug-abusing friends. Now that he is in the 
workforce, and in a job he really enjoys and treasures, the consequences of drug abuse 
will be much more severe. He stopped using illegal drugs about two years ago. He 
knows the consequences if he resumes his drug abuse. He completed SARP. With 
respect to excessive alcohol consumption, he no longer drives after drinking alcohol. 
Although he drinks alcohol to intoxication, he does not become extremely intoxicated. 
Applicant is a valued employee with excellent potential. There is no evidence at his 
current employment of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or 
that he would intentionally violate national security. His law-abiding character and good 
work performance shows some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His co-
workers, friends and supervisors support approval of his clearance. I am satisfied that 
his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his current ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations show solid future potential for access to 
classified information.  
                                            
12Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a substantial problem with drug abuse for nine years. He abused 
marijuana from 1997 to August 2006, using the substance approximately 50 times. He 
used cocaine five times from June 2001 to March 2006. He used mushrooms three 
times from January 2004 to September 2006. He was terminated from employment 
because he tested positive showing marijuana use in 2001. He did not attend any drug 
treatment or counseling program. These serious drug problems are fully mitigated for 
the reasons previously discussed. However, his problems with alcohol cannot be 
mitigated at this time. He has consumed alcohol to intoxication two or three times each 
month from approximately 1997 to the present. He had a DUI in 2003, and was 
terminated from employment in 2001 because beer was found at his work station. Even 
after being informed that there was a security concern with drinking alcohol to 
intoxication in SOR ¶ 1.a, he continued to drink alcohol to intoxication. His decision to 
continue to drink alcohol to intoxication was knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. 
He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. Excessive alcohol 
consumption shows a lack of judgment and/or impulse control. Such conduct raises a 
serious security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted at this time. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to drug involvement, but not alcohol consumption.    
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”13 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2e:   For Applicant 
 
 
13See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
