 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-12550 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-Qip), on January 30, 2007. On March 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 10, 2008, which was 
received at DOHA on April 11, 2008. She answered the SOR in writing on May 21, 
2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on June 9, 2008, and I received the case assignment on June 
 
2 
 
 
19, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 23, 2008, scheduling the hearing 
for August 5, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Government also submitted a Government’s Exhibit 
List, which was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, and 
testified on her own behalf. I held the record open until August 15, 2008 to afford the 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional material. Applicant timely submitted 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 14, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.d., 1.f., 1.j. – 1.z., and 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., and 1.g. – 1.i. Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old security officer, who had worked for her defense 
contractor employer since December 2006 until she was laid off in May 2008. She held 
an interim security clearance which was granted in February 2007 and was withdrawn in 
March 2008 as a result of these proceedings. She seeks to reinstate her security 
clearance which is a requirement of her employment. GE 1, Tr. 15-17.  
 
Applicant graduated from college in May 2008 with a bachelor of science degree 
in criminal justice. Tr. 14-15. She has never been married and has no dependents. GE 
1, Tr. 17-18. As of the date of her hearing, Applicant was unemployed and did not have 
a source of income. Applicant testified she helped support her mother and four brothers, 
ages 23, 18, 14, and 11. Tr. 18-19. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included among other things the review of her January 2007 e-QIP, her November 2007 
Signed Response to Interrogatories and Attachments, her May 2008, February 2008, 
and March 2007 credit reports, and her January 2004 and January 2007 judgments. GE 
1 – 7. 
 
The SOR alleged 26 separate debts approximating $26,000. Broken down, the 
debts include one past due account, two judgments, three charged off accounts, and 20 
collection accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.z.) The majority of debts were for 
uncovered/unpaid medical bills. Applicant testified she has a history of diabetes for 
which she has received treatment since 2000/2001. Tr. 20-21. 
 
As previously noted, Applicant is unemployed. She testified she is living off her 
savings, which consisted of about $2,000 at the time of her hearing. Tr. 27. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant appeared at her hearing ill prepared to address the debts alleged in the 
SOR. She only paid three non-medical debts, those being debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 
1.g., and 1.i., in the respective amounts of $715, $358 and $705. Tr. 48.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that she had contacted or was in contact with 
any of her creditors or that she had sought financial counseling.  
 
Post-hearing she submitted a form letter intended for creditors which purports to 
resolve individual debts. There is no indication who was the recipient of this letter, if 
anyone. AE A. She also submitted copies of three voided checks, which apparently are 
meant to document payment to debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.g., and 1.i., supra. 
 
Post-hearing, she submitted two personal reference letters, which provide 
positive comments about her character. AE B, AE D. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern is that 
an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations dating back to 
at least 2001. Apart from making payments on three debts, Applicant’s indebtedness for 
her remaining 23 debts exceeding $24,000 remains unpaid. At the time of her hearing, 
she was unemployed and was living off her savings, which she said consisted of about 
$2,000. She does not have a plan to resolve her indebtedness apart from seeking a job 
and began paying her bills as she is able.  
 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented a prima facie case. Applicant’s financial difficulties remain ongoing. Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; apply in 
this case.  
 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude that Applicant is able to 
receive partial credit under Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC ¶ 
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; for her uncovered medical expenses related to her diabetes.  
 
However, whatever credit she received by this MC is overcome by her financial 
mismanagement for the last several years. Applicant presented minimal or no evidence 
documenting efforts taken to contact or resolve debts with her unpaid creditors.   
 
She presented no evidence to show she has dealt responsibly with her financial 
obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, credible payment plans). Applicant’s financial history and lack 
of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she has established a track record of 
financial responsibility, or that she has taken control of her financial situation. Based on 
her past performance, any prospective assurances ring hollow. Her financial problems 
are likely to be a concern in the future. Moreover, her financial problems are recent, not 
isolated, and ongoing.  
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
While Applicant’s situation is most unfortunate, overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial difficulties.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g. – 1.i.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j. – 1.z.:  Against Applicant 
   
 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
