 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-14465 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Faisal M. Gill, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on March 13, 2007. On March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 3, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received his response on April 4, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 14, 2008, and I received 
the case assignment on May 21, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 13, 
2008, scheduling the hearing for July 16, 2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. The government submitted a List of Government Exhibits, 
Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were 
received without objection, and testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until July 25, 2008 to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE J through 
N, without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 2008.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Withdrawal of SOR allegation and Stipulation 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a Notice, dated May 19, 2008, stating the 
Government: 
 
1. Withdraws Guideline E allegations; and 
 
2. Stipulates that Applicant has paid the debts alleged in 1.a., 1.c., 1.e., 1.i., 
1.o., and 1.p. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His denials with 
explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old senior field engineer, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since November 2007. GE 1, Tr. 56-57. He seeks a security 
clearance to enhance his position. Tr. 40, 57-58.  
 
Applicant graduated from college in June 1997 with a bachelor of science in 
computer information science. GE 1, Tr. 56. He has never married and has no 
dependents. GE 1. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his March 2007 e-QIP, his January 2008 Response to DOHA 
Financial Interrogatory, and his April 2007 and February 2008 credit reports. GE 1 – 4.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 19 separate line items, which included one 
judgment, 12 collection accounts, two charged off accounts, and four past due 
accounts approximating $48,000. Two of the debts are duplicates, i.e. SOR ¶¶ 1.h. 
and 1.j., thus reducing the number of valid debts from 19 to 18. 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to an extensive period of 
unemployment/underemployment from December 2002 to March 2007. Applicant lost 
his job as a senior systems analyst in December 2002. At that time, he was making 
$75k per year. Tr. 70. For the next five years, he held a number of jobs to include 
grocery story cashier, driver for an auto parts store, salesman for a kitchen and 
cabinet shop, grocery store bakery clerk, technical systems support, and office 
manager/kitchen salesman/bookkeeper for a kitchen and cabinet shop. From 2002 to 
2007, he went “on over a hundred interviews.” Tr. 26. During this time, he was also 
plagued with medical problems such as hypertension, kidney and urological issues 
requiring frequent medical treatment, which compounded Applicant’s financial 
problems.  Tr. 63-65.  
  
Since his SOR was issued, Applicant has paid, settled and/or resolved all debts 
alleged. As noted, before the hearing convened, the Government stipulated that 
Applicant had paid debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.e., 1.i., 1.o., and 1.p. 
Additionally, Applicant has paid debts alleged in SOR  ¶¶ 1.b., 1.g., 1.q., 1.r., and 1.s. 
He is engaged in good-faith disputes for debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d., and 1.f. As 
noted, debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h., and 1.j. are duplicates or the same debt. 
Applicant has written numerous letters to these creditors in an attempt to resolve this 
debt. The remaining debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., and 1.n. are outstanding. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l. are student loans and have been consolidated. Applicant is 
currently paying a collection agency $275 for one year and after that his student 
loan(s) will be rehabilitated. Applicant is actively engaged in seeking a resolution with 
the creditors listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.m. and 1.n., a student loan and an automobile loan, 
respectively. AE M. Applicant provided sufficient and voluminous documentation 
addressing each and every debt in the SOR. GE 2, Answer to SOR, AE F – H, AE N. 
Applicant reported his current annual salary is $70k per year. 
 
Applicant also sought the assistance of a professional financial counselor. The 
counselor provided him with a comprehensive debt management strategy. After 
Applicant has paid all expenses, he has approximately $118 remaining in discretionary 
income per month. AE L. Applicant also submitted a budget that breaks down every 
debt with corresponding monthly payments to each creditor. AE K. 
 
Applicant provided six favorable reference letters. i.e. a letter from his landlord, 
four work-related references, and one personal reference. All references support the 
notion that Applicant is trustworthy and honorable. AE A – E, AE I. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 The Government established that Applicant owed substantial debt as reflected 
in SOR ¶¶1.a. – 1.s. Applicant’s indebtedness stems from a five year period of 
underemployment and unemployment. During this time, he fell behind with his 
creditors. In March 2007, his life took a turnaround when he was fortunate to secure a 
job in his career field that paid $70k per year.  
 
His financial situation has substantially improved as a result of earning more 
income. He sought financial counseling that provided him with a comprehensive 
strategy to regain financial stability. He has established a credible budget. All 
indicators point to an individual who has taken this process quite seriously and taken 
what appears to be all reasonable steps to correct his financial situation. What is 
different now as opposed to before is he has the means, tools and resolve to achieve 
financial stability. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline F by showing Applicant 
owed the debts as alleged, except as noted, by the evidence presented. At the time 
the SOR was issued in April 2008, Applicant owed 18 debts approximating $48,000. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20, there are three potentially mitigating conditions: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 I am able to apply full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because at the time Applicant 
incurred the debts, he was either underemployed or unemployed for a five-year 
period. I am able to apply full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because Applicant has sought 
financial counseling and has a viable strategy to achieve financial stability and a 
credible budget. I am able to apply full credit under AG ¶ 20(d) because Applicant 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. In 
short, Applicant has turned his financial situation around. He has established a viable 
budget, which shows a net remainder after he has paid his bills, and is able to save 
money. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.s.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a. – 2.c.:  Withdrawn 
 
 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
