1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )          ISCR Case No. 07-15858
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer  Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 9, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 9,
2007. On April 4, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H, E,
and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on June 2, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
June 26, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 9, 2008, and I convened the
hearing on August 1, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 12, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and one other witness
testified on behalf of Applicant. He submitted Exhibits A through C, Which were
received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on August
2
11, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations1.a., 1.b.,1.c., and 1.d., and  he
denied 2.a., 2.b.,  and 3.a. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings
of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant and the
other witness, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional
findings of fact: 
Applicant is 34 years old. He is married, and he has two children. He received a
Bachelor of Science degree in 1997. 
Applicant works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists 4 allegations regarding illegal drug involvement under Adjudicative
Guideline H. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were
listed in the SOR:
1.a. Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency, at times three to six times
a year,  from approximately 1991 through at least December 2006.  
Applicant testified that he actually last used marijuana on November 23, 2006.
He testified that he has matured and also because he is a father he does not think he
should use it in the future. 
He testified credibly that he intends to never use marijuana again. He explained
that he has committed to his girlfriend that he will not use it again. He is planning a life
with his girlfriend, and he does not want drugs to play a part in that life. He also testified
that using Marijuana would hurt his career, about which he is now more serious. Finally,
he testified that even if he did not need a security clearance, he has made a decision
that he will not use marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. 
1.b.  Applicant was arrested on or about June 19, 1994, and charged with
Planting and Cultivating Marijuana and or Hashish.  He was detained in jail for two days.
He testified that a friend gave him some marijuana plants and equipment, and Applicant
set about to grow the marijuana plants. In the police report (Exhibit 5) Applicant told the
police that he planned to grow the marijuana to use himself, because he was spending
too much money for the marijuana. Also in the police report it states that Applicant’s girl
friend, whom Applicant testified is now his wife, stated that the marijuana found in their
3
bedroom, was for Applicant’s personal use, “but occasionally he would sell it to friends.”
Although Applicant denied that he sold marijuana, he could give no reason for his
former girlfriend, and now wife, telling the police officers that he did sell marijuana at
times. Finally Applicant did concede that  if the marijuana plants all grew, he considered
selling the excess marijuana after he retained enough for his usage. 
1.c.  Applicant was arrested on or about September 26, 1998, as a result of a
warrant for his arrest from a 1992 Driving Under the Influence offense, during which he
was also charged with Possession of a Marijuana Cigarette. He was placed in a three
month drug diversion program, at which time the drug related offense was removed
from his record. Applicant testified that the warrant was also dismissed, because he had
previously fulfilled all of the requirements for the 1992 arrest.
 1.d. Applicant continued to use marijuana through at least December 2006, even
though he was granted and possessed a security clearance from April 1998 to the
present. He testified that after he first completed a SCA, he was interviewed by a
Government investigator, and at that time he wrote a signed, sworn statement in which
he promised that he would abstain from all drug usage in the future. Applicant conceded
that he did not keep that promise, nor could he give a reason for his failure to keep his
promise. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he exhibited conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of
candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
2.a. the conduct as set forth under paragraph 1., above. 
2.b. Applicant executed a SCA on November 29, 1997 (Exhibit 11).  Question
#24 of the SCA asked since the age of 16 or in the previous seven years, whichever is
shorter, had Applicant illegally used any controlled substance? Applicant answered
"Yes" to this question, and replied that he had used marijuana on three occasions
between August 1991 to June 1993. The Government alleges that Applicant’s use of
marijuana was far more frequent and extensive than that listed by Applicant as
discussed in subparagraph 1.a., above.  At the hearing Applicant conceded that he did
not include the full amount of his marijuana usage, because it could potentially hurt his
chances of receiving a clearance. 
2.c.  During a June 18, 2007 interview with an authorized investigator for the
Department of Defense, Applicant minimized his culpability in the 1994 drug cultivation
arrest, as discussed in 1.b., above. In the signed, sworn statement that he made as a
result of the interview (Exhibit 4), Applicant stated that a friend offered to help Applicant
with his rent if he let the friend use his garage to cultivate the marijuana. At the hearing
Applicant conceded that this statement was not true.  Applicant also failed to identify to
the investigator that packets of marijuana were also found when the police searched
4
Applicant’s home. He did not give any reasonable explanation for his failure to give
complete and truthful answers about this event to the investigator.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in criminal conduct. 
3.a. Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 2, subparagraphs b. and
c., constitutes a violation of Federal Law, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001,
which is a felony.
Mitigation
Applicant submitted performance evaluations from his employer from 2002
through 2007 (Exhibit B). The ratings were quite positive with the overall rating of no
less than “Meets Requirements” and as high as “Far Exceeds Requirements.” He also
submitted some photographs of his family and some depicting him in his position as a
children’s soccer coach (Exhibit C), which he has done for five years.
Finally, a witness, who is a manager of Applicant, and has known him for more
than ten years testified very positively on his behalf. However, when he was confronted
with the information that Applicant had been using marijuana while possessing a
security clearance and as recently as 2006, he indicated that he felt “betrayed”, and that
Applicant “has let a  lot (sic) of people down obviously.”
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
5
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, including the possession, and use of
marijuana, and his many years of continued use after receiving a security clearance is
of great concern, especially in light of his continued desire to have access to the
nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse
clearly falls within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25. (a) (any drug
abuse), (c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution), and (g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a
security clearance).
Based on the Applicant’s many years of use of an illegal substance, especially
while holding a security clearance, and his lack of candor in the information about his
drug involvement that he furnished to the Government, I can not conclude at this time
that Applicant’s conduct comes within any Mitigating Condition (MC). 
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H.
Applicant, on the other hand, has failed to introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
6
explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against
him.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant received a
security clearance in April 1996,  and yet he continued to use marijuana through at least
December 2006. 
Applicant’s continued use of marijuana for many years, after being granted and
maintaining a security clearance, shows extremely poor judgement. 
Additionally, the evidence establishes that Applicant furnished to the Government
incomplete, untruthful answers regarding the extent of his drug involvement on a SCA
that he executed on November 29, 1997, and during an interview with a Government
investigator on June 18, 2007.
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a Government investigator, it is extremely
difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty
necessary for an individual given a clearance. In this case, I conclude that Applicant
knowingly and willingly failed to give complete, honest answers regarding his drug
usage to the Government.
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline E, I conclude that
DC 16. (a) applies because of Applicant’s deliberate omission, concealment, and
falsification of relevant facts from a personnel security questionnaire, which was used to
determine security clearance eligibility. DC (b) also applies since Applicant deliberately
provided false relevant information to the Government investigator. I can not find that
any Mitigating Condition (MC) applies in this paragraph.  
Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits questionable judgement,
unreliability, and a lack of candor. I resolve Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The Government also established by substantial evidence that Applicant
engaged in criminal conduct, by his knowingly providing false and misleading
information to the Government investigator and on a  security questionnaire, which is a
felony.
DC 31. (a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this
case. DC 31. (c), allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged, is also applicable to this case. There is no MC under
Criminal Conduct. Paragraph 3, Guideline J is found against Applicant
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines H, E, and J in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s long history of using
marijuana, even while holding a security clearance, and his lack of honesty and candor
with the information he furnished to the Government, I find that the record evidence
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability
for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
