                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13066 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le'i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed the IRS $183,000. The tax lien has been released. No taxes are 
owed the IRS or state tax commission. In 2001, Applicant started using marijuana as an 
attempt to address depression he experienced resulting from participation in a medical 
clinical study. He used marijuana daily from 2001 to 2004. He has since sought 
treatment and no additional treatment is warranted. Applicant has successfully mitigated 
financial considerations, drug involvement, and personal conduct security concerns. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 9, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, for delinquent taxes, Guideline H, drug 
involvement based on his daily use of marijuana from 2001 to 2004, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct, for using marijuana after having been issued a clearance. 
  
 On May 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
July 24, 2008, I was assigned the case. On July 24, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on August 12, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were admitted into evidence. On 
August 19, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant is a 54-year-old teacher and part-time copier who has been self employed 
since 1998, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance he has held since 1991. (Tr. 
41) An individual who works for Applicant states Applicant is a wonderful person who 
treats everyone with respect and is a devoted husband and father. (Ex. E) A friend and 
acquaintance states Applicant is a man of strong faith who recognizes and has dealt 
with his past mistakes, is sorry for them, and works diligently to lead a good life. A co-
worker states Applicant is a responsible person who arrives early and leaves late to 
insure all requirements are completed. He is a wonderful and patient teacher. Another 
co-worker states Applicant is a terrific co-worker, considerate friend, an ideal confidante, 
diligent worker, and very good at his job. He is also a dedicated and loving husband and 
father. (Ex. E)  
 
 Applicant has been married for 32 years. (Tr. 32) He has four children: a 
daughter 30, and three sons ages 29, 27, and 20. (Tr. 33) Applicant grew up in the 
printing business. His father was a newspaper foreman and in high school, Applicant 
started working in printing. (Tr. 35) In 1980, Applicant and his wife started a printing 
business in their home. In 1985, Applicant took a full-time job at a publishing company. 
(Tr. 38) In 1986, Applicant’s brother asked him to join him in a blueprinting business. 
They stayed in business for 12 years. (Tr. 38) It grew to encompass three locations and 
50 employees. (Tr. 39) That business had no tax problems. (Tr. 82)  
 
 In 1982 two years after opening the business, Applicant first took his business 
records to an accountant. (Tr. 58) In June 1981, he was the driver when his car hit a 
telephone pole killing a high school friend who was a passenger in the car. Applicant 
and his friend had been drinking and after leaving the bar Applicant fell asleep driving 
home. Applicant was criminally charged with driving while intoxicated. (Gov Ex. 2) 
Applicant’s father died and Applicant and his wife moved 200 miles to a new location. 
(Tr. 59) He did not return to an account until 1986. At that time, the accountant told him 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
                                                          
he owed $100,000 in back taxes and penalties for failing to file his taxes for several 
years. (Tr. 59) In 1989, Applicant asserts he filed tax returns for tax years 1980 through 
1989.2 (Tr. 60) 
 
 In 1985, Applicant turned down a printing job for a member of the former Soviet 
Union. The Soviet Union wanted a book published by an American printer and was 
willing to pay a large amount of money. (Tr. 56) Applicant declined the job and called 
the State Department and the FBI and informed them of the offer.  
 
 In 1998, Applicant sold the business and went back to school to obtain his 
teaching degree. (Tr. 39, 93) He was in school for two years and was sick and could not 
work for one year. (Tr. 66) In March 2001, Applicant was diagnosed with Hepatitis C, he 
lost 40 pounds in a month and a half, and on some days the most he could accomplish 
during the day was to walk the dog. (Tr. 90) 
 
 The 1998-sale was motivated in part to repay an IRS debt. In 1998, Applicant 
started a small printing business using another company’s equipment at night to do his 
printing. (Tr. 41, 66) He is the only shareholder of a printing corporation. He now works 
part-time copying large documents. (Tr. 40) The corporation is a small business Sub S 
corporation by which all losses and profits flow through to the individual, who in this 
case is the Applicant. (Tr. 85) 
 
In 1992, Applicant hired an attorney to help him address his tax problems. (Tr. 
43) Applicant’s problems with the IRS were compounded by tax agents transferring or 
for other reasons new agents taking over the case. Applicant asserts when the new tax 
agent took over, the process would start from the beginning again. (Tr. 45) In 1992, 
Applicant made an Offer in Compromise (Offer) to the IRS, which was rejected by the 
IRS. In March 1993, a second offer was made. In October 1994, another offer was 
made.  
 
In 1995, the matter was reassigned to another revenue officer. In April 1996, it 
was assigned to a different revenue examiner. In June 1996, the examiner 
recommended acceptance of the offer and submitted the offer through channels. In 
January 1997 the offer was rejected. In 1999, the rejection was sustained. (Tr. 65) Until 
the final rejection, the statute of limitations on collection of Applicant’s taxes was 
suspended.  
 
In 1993, for approximately one year Applicant made $167 monthly payments to 
the IRS. (Tr. 46, 61, Ex. A) Additionally, the IRS has intercepted Applicant’s tax refunds 
and applied the overpayment to taxes owed. Applicant had overpaid his taxes in tax 
years 2002, 2003, and 2004. (Ex. A) In 2003 and 2004, Applicant’s remaining tax 
liability was barred by the statute of limitations. In 2006, the IRS declared his tax 
obligation uncollectible. (Tr. 67, Ex. A)  
 
2 Applicant did not explain how he filed his 1989 taxes in 1989 since the normal filing deadline for 
1989 taxes would have been April 1990.  
 
 
 
4
 Applicant was indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for delinquent 
taxes and penalties. Applicant provided three certificates of Release of Federal Tax Lien 
(Tax Lien Release). On October 12, 1993, a Tax Lien Release was filed releasing 
$97,000 in IRS assessments for tax years 1982 through 1988 and 1999. (Ex A) On 
March 12, 2001, a Tax Lien Release was filed releasing $185,000 in assessment for tax 
years 1985 through and including 1988. (Ex. A) A September 2005, IRS letter stated 
Applicant’s 2004 overpayment of tax refund was applied to taxes owed by Applicant for 
1989 and 1993 On August 16, 2004, a Tax Lien Release was filed releasing $6,600 in 
assessment for tax years 1989 and 1993. (Ex. A) 
 
 Applicant provided a letter from the state comptroller reported he owes no taxes 
for tax year 1988, 1990 through 1993, and 1996. (Ex. A)  
 
 Applicant had used marijuana off-and-on from high school until 1987 when he 
was 33 years old. (Tr. 68) He would use it in his home. During this period, there were 
times when he did not use it for months or years. (Tr. 68) He thought marijuana and 
primarily alcohol were making his life unmanageable. After work he would sometimes 
go out for a beer, and then his use gradually increased to the point where it was all the 
time. In July 1987, he said no more and quit drinking and smoking marijuana. (Tr. 69, 
88) In 1987, he checked him into a 30-day in-patient substance abuse treatment 
program. (Tr. 80) 
 
 In March 2001, following a Hepatitis C diagnoses, Applicant became part of a 
one year medical clinical study/trial for the drug interferon. Depression was a side affect 
of the drug. When he became depressed, a nurse at the trial told him marijuana helped 
some people deal with the depression. (Tr. 70, Ex. 2) When he was sick he lost 40 
pounds in a month and a half. The most he could accomplish during the day was to 
walk the dog. (Tr. 90) 
 
From June 2001 until February 2004, Applicant – then age 47 to 50 – smoked 
marijuana daily until arrested in February 2004. At the hearing, Applicant characterized 
his decision to start using marijuana again as “one of the dumbest decision I ever 
made.” (Tr. 70) His marijuana use occurred while hold a security clearance, which he 
had held since 1991. (Tr. 72)  
 
In September 2001, he was told he could no longer participate in the study due to 
his depression. Applicant never saw a health professional concerning his depression, 
but stated his depression stopped when he stopped using interferon. (Tr. 72) After 
leaving the study, Applicant continued using marijuana which he characterized as a 
“bad decision.” He would usually buy $50 of marijuana at a time, which was a quarter 
ounce of marijuana. In February 2004, shortly after purchasing marijuana he was 
arrested. Applicant’s case was placed on the Stet docket and then nolle prossed in June 
2005.  
 
 Applicant’s last marijuana use was the day he was arrested. (Tr. 53) He is very 
vigilant to make sure he never uses marijuana again. On August 6, 2008, he signed an 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
affidavit acknowledging he last used illegal drugs in February 2004 and would not use 
illegal drugs in the future. (Tr. 54) He stated he was willing to submit to drug testing and 
any drug use would result in the loss of any clearance he held. (Ex. D) Applicant 
submitted a certificate of completion of a county department of correction and 
rehabilitation intervention program for substance abusers (IPSA), having completed six 
weeks of education in IPSA. (Ex. D)  
 
 Police records pertaining to Applicant’s arrest, detention, or confinement on 
February 23, 2004, and the court records of this action by the district court on October 
18, 2005, were ordered expunged. Following his February 2004 arrest, Applicant 
entered an intervention program for substance abusers for six weeks. (Ex. D) In 2004, 
he also completed 20 weeks of treatment. (Tr. 52, Ex. D) He learned how to handle 
stress and learned life-skills. (Tr. 53) In August 2008, Applicant was in an outpatient 
program. He was assessed as a level two problem/user. (Ex. D) No further treatment 
was deemed necessary at that time. A drug screen reported August 2008, was positive 
for opiates for which he had a prescription and negative for PCP, methamphetamine, 
THC, and cocaine. The prescription was for his arthritis in his hips. (Tr. 55)  
 
Applicant frequently attends Saturday morning Alcoholic’s Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. (Tr. 74) His most recent AA token was a ten-year token. (Tr. 81) The token 
that matters most to him is the one day at a time coin. (Tr. 81)  
 
 As a fourth grade teacher, Applicant makes $50,000 a year. (Tr. 49) He has been 
teaching seven years at a Title 1 school.3 (Tr. 34, 94) His wife makes $35,000 per year 
as a receptionist. His part-time work as a copier makes $2,000 to $10,000 a year. (Tr. 
85). Applicant is current on his rent, utilities, and other debts. He is not being contacted 
by creditors concerning past due obligations. His car is almost paid for and he is current 
on his student loans on which he pays $200 per month. (Tr. 92) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
3 Title 1 is a federal entitlement program to help students who are behind academically or at risk 
of falling behind. Applicant states Title 1 schools means schools for the very poor. (Tr. 94) 
 
 
 
 
6
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
7
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant had a history of financial 
problems. Applicant failed to file his 1980 through 1989 income taxes until 1989. At one 
time he owed the IRS $185,000 in back taxes. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” and AG ¶19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required,” apply. 
 
In 1980, Applicant opened a small business. Two years later he went to an 
accountant. He did not return to the accountant until 1986. He had been involved in an 
auto accident and resulting court action, his father had died, and he had made a 200 
mile move. Taxes were filed in 1989, resulting in $100,000 owed to the IRS. Starting in 
1992, numerous offers in compromise where made, rejected, and resubmitted. 
Applicant made sporadic payments and any tax refund he was due was intercepted to 
pay his past due tax obligation. In 2006, the IRS declared his tax obligation 
uncollectible. 
 
 Applicant provided three certificates of Release of Federal Tax. In October 1993, 
$97,000 was released for tax years 1982 through 1988 and 1999. In March 2001, 
$185,000 in assessment was released for tax years 1985 through and including 1988. 
In September 2005, a Tax Lien Release was filed releasing $6,600 in assessment for 
tax years 1989 and 1993, which had been filed in August 2004. Applicant provided a 
letter from the state comptroller stating he owed no taxes for tax year 1988, 1990 
through 1993, and 1996. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
8
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; [and] 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems with the IRS started with his 
failure to file his 1980 income tax return. Applicant first attempted to correct the problem 
by seeking legal help in 1992 – 16 years ago. Between October 1993 and August 2004, 
the tax liens were released and in 2006 his tax obligations were declared uncollectible. 
From 1992 through 2006, he was actively pursuing the correction of his tax problems. 
After 14 years of involvement with the IRS it is unlikely he will again incur tax 
delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
AG & 20(b) does apply. AG & 20(c) applies when a “person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control.” Applicant owes no money to the IRS or the state 
tax commission. Applicant is current on his rent, utilities, and other debts. He is not 
being contacted by creditors concerning past due obligations. His car is almost paid for 
and he is current on his student loans. There are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. 
 
AG & 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to repay the creditors and AG & 20(e) 
applies when the legitimacy of the debt is disputed. Applicant made numerous offers in 
compromise over the years. There is no evidence as to the details of the offers. 
However, IRS found the offers insufficient to justify acceptance, except for his assertion 
that one examiner forward an offer recommending approval. Without the details of the 
offer it is impossible to say they constituted a “good-faith” effort to repay the debt.  
 
Additionally, the record is insufficient to establish Applicant had a reasonable 
basis to dispute the “legitimacy” of his delinquent taxes. Nothing in the record indicates 
he was challenging the validity of his tax debts or took the matter to tax court. It appears 
he was simply arguing over the amount of taxes owed and not the legitimacy of the 
taxes. AG & 20(d) and AG & 20(e) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant had used marijuana off-and-on from high school until 1987 when he 
was 33 years old. During this period, there were times when he did not use it for months 
or years. He quit because he thought marijuana and alcohol were making his life 
unmanageable. In June 2001, he resumed using marijuana daily and continued until his 
arrest in February 2004. His most recent use occurred when he held a security 
clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) drug use, AG ¶ 25(c) purchase, and AG ¶ 25(g) illegal drug use after 
have being granted a security clearance apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
 
 
 
10
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 Applicant last used marijuana in February 2004, approximately four and a half 
years ago. Applicant characterized his decision to start using marijuana again in 2004 
as “one of the dumbest decision I ever made.” Applicant stated he would not use illegal 
drugs in the future. In August 2008, he signed an affidavit stating he would submit to 
drug testing and any drug use would result in the loss of his clearance. He is very 
vigilant to make sure he never uses again. 
 
Following his arrest, he entered an intervention program for substance abusers. 
He learned how to handle stress and learned life-skills. As of August 2008, Applicant 
went to an outpatient program where additional treatment was not recommended. 
Applicant frequently attends Saturday morning AA meetings and has been involved with 
AA for ten years. However, the token that matters most to him is the one day at a time 
token. Applicant completed a county department of correction and rehabilitation 
intervention program for substance abusers. 
 
Applicant used marijuana daily for four years. His use can not be said to be 
infrequent. However, It has been more than four and a half years since his last 
marijuana use. There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” 
The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record 
within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 
(App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring 
 
 
 
11
                                                          
approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”4 
 
Because of his abstention from drug use for four and a half years, and his 
recognition of the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse, there is reasonable certitude 
that he will continue to abstain from drug use. This finding is made knowing Applicant 
had abstained from illegal drug usage for 14 years – from 1987 through 2004 – before 
using marijuana again. However, Applicant’s return to using marijuana, which he 
acknowledges was a stupid thing to do, was a misdirected approach to addressing his 
depression caused by his participation in a clinical study. Applicant did not attempt to 
hide his arrest or illegal usage. He listed both on his April 2007 SF 86. His marijuana 
use ending more than four years ago does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the future, 
confidence in his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment with respect to 
drug use is restored. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) applies because he has stated he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future. He has demonstrated his intent not to abuse drugs in the future by the four and a 
half years since his last use and by signing a statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of his clearance for any violation.  
 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
12
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because abuse of prescription drugs was not a 
problem. AG ¶ 26(d) applies because he has satisfactorily completed a drug treatment 
program, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. Applicant completed 20 weeks of treatment in 2004 and six weeks 
of education with IPSA. As of August 2008, no further treatment was necessary. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Applicant used marijuana after having been issued a secret security clearance, 
which was alleged under Guideline H, drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 16 conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include AG ¶ 16(d) “credible 
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not 
be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.  
 
There is nothing different in listing his use of marijuana after obtaining a 
clearance under both criminal conduct and personal conduct. The underlying security 
concern remains the same. Having found for Applicant for this event under criminal 
conduct, I find no additional disqualifying or additional security concerns under the 
personal conduct guideline. 
 
Since illegal drug use after having been issued a clearance is specifically 
covered by Guideline H, drug involvement, I find Guideline E, personal conduct, does 
not apply to this drug use allegation. I find for Applicant as to SOR ¶ 3 a.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
13
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant no longer has a debt to 
the IRS. Between 1992 and 2004, he was actively attempting to negotiate a settlement 
with the IRS. He recognized the problem, hired an attorney to help him correct his tax 
problem, and actively sought to negotiate a settlement of the problem. He is living within 
his means and is current on his debts.  
 
Applicant has been married 32 years, is hard working, diligent, and responsible. 
His friends and co-workers praise his character and dedication. He smoked marijuana 
daily while holding a clearance, but that use ended more than four years ago. He has 
received treatment and showed remorse. He is active in AA and is sincere when he 
states he will not use again.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations, drug involvement, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
