1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16170
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On April 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
DOHA received Applicant’s SOR answer on May 22, 2008. In the answer,
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations and requested a hearing. I received the
case assignment on July 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 23, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 18, 2008. During the hearing, I
received five government exhibits, eight Applicant exhibits and Applicant’s testimony.
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2008. Based upon a review of
the record, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old, married man with one daughter, age 16, and one
stepdaughter, age 24. He and his wife have been married for nine years, and in a
relationship for 22 years (Tr. 43). After graduating from high school in 1979, Applicant
joined the U.S. Marines, where he served until his honorable discharge in 1984. While
enlisted, he served abroad as part of an international peacekeeping force, and was
awarded the combat action ribbon (Tr. 9).
For the past 20 years, Applicant has worked as a U.S. military aircraft mechanic.
Specifically, he is an instrumentation and electronics technician (Tr. 9). He has worked
for the same company for the past 18 months. Before then, he worked for another
employer for 15 years. His supervisor characterizes him as “a good and loyal employee,
who could be trusted in every facet of [their] maintenance and operational commitment
to [their] customer” (Exhibit A).
Applicant decided to join the Marines shortly after graduating from high school.
His father disapproved of his decision. As Applicant was preparing to depart for boot
camp, his father, in a drunken rage, began taunting and physically assaulting him. After
years of physical abuse, Applicant had “had enough” (Tr. 37). He shoved his father to
the floor, and left the home. The next day, the police arrested and charged him with
assault and battery. His father later dropped the charges, and the case was dismissed
(Id.).
In 1986, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DUI).
Later, the court fined him, and ordered him to attend Alcoholic’s Anonymous (AA)
classes, and report to an alcohol monitor for a year (Tr. 53). He complied with the court
order.
In January 1989, Applicant’s friend stole a video from a video store while they
were leaving the store. The police stopped both of them, and charged them with
misdemeanor theft (Answer; Tr. 54). Later, Applicant received one year of probation
before judgment and was fined $100.
One evening in May 1995, Applicant and his girlfriend got into an argument. He
then went for a walk to “avoid any further confrontation” (Tr. 32). When he returned, his
girlfriend had the hood of his car up, and was “dislodging everything that she could
possibly dislodge from under the motor compartment” (Id.). He shoved her to the
ground, and his stepdaughter called the police, who arrived, arrested him, and charged
him with assault and battery. The charge was later nolle prossed (Tr. 34; Answer).
In February 2003, Applicant’s wife shoved him during a heated argument. He
responded by shoving her, and she fell to the floor. Before hitting the floor, she hit her
jaw on the dining room table (Tr. 30). Applicant then drove her to the emergency room.
While en route to the hospital, their argument resumed (Tr. 30). Applicant then stopped
the car, got out, and walked home. Before arriving home, the police stopped him, and
3
charged him with assault and battery. He was later acquitted after his wife refused to
testify against him (Answer; Tr. 31).
In August 2006, Applicant was assigned to the night shift at his job (Tr. 23).
When he would call home for his wife, she would not be at home, and their daughter
would not know her whereabouts. Suspecting that she was frequenting bars, he
confronted her one evening. An argument ensued, and he went to bed. When he awoke
in the middle of the night, his wife was not at home. He then left the home, and
confronted her at a neighborhood bar demanding that she leave (Id.). He grew “loud
and aggressive” when she refused (Tr. 24). A few of the patrons and an off-duty
bartender then asked him to leave. 
The bar environment grew hostile. Applicant, realizing he was outnumbered, left
the bar, and waited in the parking lot for his wife to leave. Approximately 10 to 15
minutes later, a few of the men who had confronted Applicant in the bar, approached his
car “looking for trouble” (Tr. 25). One of the men tried to open the back door, and
another reached through the driver’s side window, which was partially down, and began
trying to punch Applicant. Applicant then pulled the keys out of the ignition, and cut his
assailant’s arm with a bottle opener that was attached to the key chain.
Applicant was arrested and charged with assault in the second degree, disorderly
conduct, and trespassing. As part of a plea bargain, Applicant pleaded guilty to the latter
two charges, and the assault charge was stayed pending the service of 18 month
probation (Answer; Tr. 29). Also, Applicant was fined $255, and sentenced to 60 days in
jail (59 days suspended, and one day credited for time served). Applicant served
probation without incident, and the assault charge was dismissed.
In July 2008, Applicant voluntarily enrolled in anger management therapy (Exhibit
D). Since enrolling, he has attended three sessions. According to his therapist, he
“demonstrates insight, takes personal responsibility for his behavior, and recognizes the
need to make changes” (Exhibit D). In August 2008, he switched clinics to one that was
closer to his home and more affordable (Tr. 51).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
4
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness and] by its very nature, . . . calls into question a person’s
ability to abide by laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 30). Applicant’s history of criminal
conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses.” After considering the circumstances surrounding the 1979 incident, as
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f, and the length of time since it happened, I have
decided to resolve it in Applicant’s favor.
Nevertheless, Applicant’s remaining episodes of criminal conduct generate a
pattern of criminal conduct that raises questions about his security clearance-
worthiness. Applicant’s criminal offenses throughout the past 18 years have all
stemmed from his periodically troubled relationship with his wife, and his inability to
control his anger. Applicant has begun to address the latter by attending anger
management classes; however, he did not enroll until nearly three months after the
SOR’s issuance. Moreover, Applicant and his wife have never attended marital
counseling, and he provided scant evidence as to the current status of their relationship.
Applicant deserves credit for his service in the armed forces, his solid work
performance, and the initiative he demonstrated in enrolling in anger management
classes. Also, although his anger management therapy has just begun, he is actively
involved and committed to its success. These favorable factors trigger the application of
AG ¶ 31(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.”
These favorable factors, however, are not enough to outweigh the security
concern given the recency of the latest offense, the span of his criminal behavior, and
the minimal evidence about his current marital harmony. Consequently, Applicant has
not mitigated the criminal conduct security concern.
5
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Upon considering this case in the context of the whole person concept, I
conclude Applicant’s clearance must be denied. The awarding of a security clearance is
not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on current disqualifying and mitigating
conditions. Although Applicant’s current circumstances do not warrant the granting of a
security clearance, he may well establish the requisite track record of rehabilitation to
warrant the granting of a security clearance in the future. Such a judgment at this point
would be premature. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
6
