                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15356 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), 
raised by Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan and Thailand. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 8, 2006. On 
April 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 5, 2008; answered it on May 
12; 2008; and requested an administrative determination without a hearing. DOHA 
received the request on May 15, 2008. Department Counsel requested a hearing on 
June 2, 2008 (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I), and was ready to proceed on June 12, 2008. The 
case was assigned to me on July 22, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 
28, 2008, scheduling the hearing for August 19, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 
A through W, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to 
keep the record open until September 2, 2008, to submit additional documentary 
evidence. He timely submitted AE X through CC, and they were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2008. The record closed on 
September 2, 2008. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Taiwan and Thailand (HX II). I took administrative notice as requested, without 
objection from Applicant (Tr. 28). The facts administratively noticed are set out below in 
my findings of fact. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 After both sides had presented their evidence, Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR by adding an allegation that Applicant’s three brothers-in-law, one 
sister-in-law, and their spouses are citizens and residents of Thailand (Tr. 94). I 
explained to Applicant the authority for amending the SOR and the implications for him, 
and I informed him I would give him additional time to submit additional evidence 
regarding the additional allegation in the SOR. He did not object to the amendment, and 
I granted the motion to amend the SOR (Tr. 95-99). He timely submitted additional 
evidence, as noted above in the Statement of the Case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and 1.g. He partially admitted ¶ 1.f. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was born in Taiwan in October 1967. He obtained a bachelor’s degree 
in Taiwan, and then he was drafted and performed mandatory military service in the 
Taiwanese military from 1989 to 1991. After he was discharged, he came to the U.S. He 
lived for one year with his sister and brother-in-law, improving his English and preparing 
for graduate school. He obtained a master’s degree in physics in June 1994 (AX G; Tr. 
15) and a second master’s degree in electrical engineering in December 1998 (AX H 
and I). He enrolled in a doctoral program (AX J and K), but he did not complete it. He 
 
3 
 
 
has authored several scholarly articles and participated in numerous seminars and 
conferences on electronic signal processing (AX L and M).  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in October 1997. He has been employed as a 
senior engineer for a government contractor since October 2006 (AX A). He has an 
interim clearance, but he has never held a final security clearance (Tr. 15-16). 
 
 Applicant met his wife while he was obtaining his first master’s degree, and they 
were married in June 1998 (Tr. 57; AX C). They have two children who are U.S. 
citizens. His wife was born in Thailand in March 1968 (AX AA and BB). She obtained 
her bachelor’s degree in Thailand, came to the U.S. in 1992, obtained a doctorate in 
chemistry, and became a U.S. citizen in June 2004. She holds dual citizenship by virtue 
of her birth in Thailand.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s mother is deceased, and her father is a citizen and resident of 
Thailand who owned a jewelry shop but is now retired (Tr. 81). She has four married 
siblings, three brothers who own and operate a small jewelry shop (AX CC), and a sister 
who is a housewife (AX Z). All her family members live in Bangkok (GX 2 at 9). She 
maintains contact with her family in Thailand, and she visited them for approximately 
three months from December 2002 to February 2003 and again from September to 
December 2004 (AX N). Her younger sister and her spouse visited Applicant and his 
wife in the U.S. in August 2006, when her sister’s spouse received his M.B.A. degree 
from a U.S. university (Tr. 84). 
 
 Applicant’s father was born in China, left China around 1949, and is a citizen and 
resident of Taiwan. He retired from a position in the Taiwan tax department and lives in 
a nursing home (Tr. 61). Based on Applicant’s description, it appears his father was an 
auditor or low-level supervisor (Tr. 78). Applicant telephones his father about every 
other week (Tr. 86).  
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Taiwan. She has Alzheimer’s disease and lives 
in a nursing home in the U.S. Applicant cannot communicate with her because of her 
mental condition (Tr. 86).  
 
Applicant has four living siblings: a sister who is a citizen and resident of the 
U.S.; a sister who is a citizen of the U.S., married to a U.S. citizen, and teaches 
Mandarin in a Christian school in Hong Kong (AX N and O); a sister who is a citizen and 
resident of Australia; and a brother who became a Canadian citizen in May 2001, then 
became a U.S. citizen in July 2008, and resides in the U.S. (Tr. 62). 
 
 Applicant traveled to Taiwan in December 2000, September 2004, and 
December 2004; and he traveled to Thailand in December 2002 and February 2003. All 
travel was to visit his father or his wife’s family, sometimes combining business travel 
with family visits (AX Q through W). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 None of Applicant’s family in Taiwan and none of his wife’s family in Thailand are 
politically connected or politically active. Applicant’s father is the only member of either 
family who was a government employee.  
 
 Applicant has been an active member of his church for more than 13 years. 
Applicant’s minister describes him as a “sincere, responsible, and faithful” member of 
the church (AX B). He purchased a home in 2007, after renting since 1992 (AX D, E, 
and F). He has filed U.S. income tax returns every year since 1992 (AX P). He believes 
every U.S. citizen has an obligation to vote, and he has voted in every U.S. presidential 
election (Tr. 92). 
 
I have taken administrative notice that Taiwan is a multi-party democracy, 
established as a separate, independent government by refugees from mainland China 
in 1949. The People’s Republic of China (PRC) does not recognize Taiwan’s 
independence and insists there is only one China. The U.S. recognized Taiwan as an 
independent government until January 1979, when it formally recognized the PRC 
government as the sole legal government of China. Taiwan has developed a strong 
economy and has significant economic contacts with the PRC, but it also maintains a 
large military establishment to protect itself from the PRC. Commercial ties between the 
U.S. and Taiwan have expanded since 1979. For many years, Taiwan has been an 
active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, and there have been numerous instances 
of efforts to export sensitive, dual-use U.S. technology to Taiwan. 
 
 I have also taken administrative notice that Thailand is a constitutional monarchy. 
In September 2006, military leaders overthrew the democratically elected government, 
abolished Parliament, declared martial law, and issued decrees limiting free speech, 
free press, and freedom of assembly. After the coup, the U.S. suspended foreign aid, 
military training, and peace-keeping programs with Thailand. Those programs were 
resumed after a democratically-elected government was elected in December 2007 and 
took office. Thailand has an open-market economy with considerable foreign investment 
and an increasingly diversified manufacturing sector, but about 40% of Thailand’s labor 
force is agricultural. The U.S. is Thailand’s largest export market and third largest 
supplier. The U.S. and the new government of Thailand have resumed the good 
relations that existed before the coup. Thailand’s current foreign policy emphasizes a 
close security relationship with the U.S. Before and after the coup, there were reported 
instances of disappearance, torture, and arbitrary arrest and detention. There has been 
increased terrorism and politically motivated violence, particularly in the far south of 
Thailand. The incidents are focused primarily on Thai government interests, but have 
targeted tourist areas. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
5 
 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR, as amended, alleges Applicant’s father and mother are citizens of 
Taiwan and his father resides in Taiwan (SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.b); his spouse is a dual 
citizen of Taiwan and the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.c); his father-in-law, three brothers-in-law, one 
sister-in-law, and their spouses are citizens and residents of Thailand (SOR ¶ 1.d and 
1.h); he served in the Taiwanese military from 1989 to 1991 (SOR ¶ 1.e); and he 
traveled to Taiwan in September 2004, December 2004, December 2003, and 
December 2000, and to Thailand in February 2003 and December 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.f and 
1.g). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 Applicant’s military service was mandatory, and it occurred before he became a 
U.S. citizen. As such, it raises no security concerns. See AG ¶ 11(c) (Under Guideline 
 
7 
 
 
C, an exercise of an obligation of foreign citizenship can be mitigated if it occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen.) 
 
 Applicant’s foreign travel, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, was to visit family 
members and in connection with his employment. To the extent that his travel was a 
manifestation of his family ties, it has no independent security significance. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  
First, a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). When family 
members are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as 
well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  
 
 Taiwan is an active practitioner of economic espionage directed at the U.S., but 
there is no evidence Taiwan abuses its citizens to gather intelligence. Applicant’s father 
was a low-level bureaucrat in the Taiwanese government, not involved in policy-making, 
military affairs, or intelligence. His father has never been involved in the high-technology 
arena in which Applicant works. There is no evidence in the record that Thailand targets 
the U.S. for military or economic espionage, but the recent upheavals in government 
and the presence of insurgents and anti-government terrorists are sufficient to raise the 
“heightened risk” encompassed in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d). Considering the totality of 
Applicant’s foreign family ties, I conclude AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) are raised. 
 
Applicant’s spouse holds dual U.S.-Thai citizenship, and her father, siblings, and 
their spouses are citizens and residents of Thailand. I conclude the potential conflict of 
interest encompassed in AG ¶ 7(b) is raised. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant’s mother resides in the U.S. and is mentally incompetent, 
making it very difficult to influence or exploit her, but Applicant is close to his father, and 
his spouse is close to her father and siblings. Taiwan conducts economic intelligence 
against the U.S. Thailand suffers from politically-motivated terrorism and occasional 
abuses by security forces, but its newly-elected democratic government is friendly to the 
U.S. Applicant’s in-laws in Thailand are not politically active, and they live in Bangkok, 
not in the far south of Thailand where the violence is centered. Although the likelihood 
of a conflict of interest is not great, the evidence falls short of showing it is “unlikely.” 
Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant left Taiwan many years ago and has no emotional or political ties to the 
government of Taiwan. His ties to his parents, and his spouse’s ties to her family are not 
“minimal,” but Applicant has developed deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S. He has lived, studied, and worked in the U.S. since about 1992, and 
he has been a U.S. citizen since 1997. He met his spouse in the U.S., and she has 
been a U.S. citizen since 2004. He has two small children who are citizens of the U.S. 
and whose future is in the U.S. Three of his four siblings are citizens of the U.S., and 
two of them reside in the U.S. His ailing mother resides in the U.S. with one of his 
siblings. His only family member residing in Taiwan is his father. He has been an active 
member of his church for more than 13 years. All of his financial assets are in the U.S. I 
am satisfied that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the interests 
of the U.S. Therefore, I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. I incorporate 
my comments above under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He was meticulously prepared, 
articulate, candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He is proud of his work and fully 
committed to being a good citizen of the U.S. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on 
foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
