                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 07-12398 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Menedez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s trustworthiness concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
On May 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline J 
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing onJuly 3, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. I was assigned the case on August 7, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 11, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 3, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
which were admitted without objection and offered GE 5 and 6 in rebuttal, which were 
also admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and did not offer 
any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 11, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c of the SOR, with an explanation that certain charges in 1.a had 
been dismissed on appeal.  
 
Applicant is 52 years old and works as a consultant on government contracts for 
a federal contractor. Applicant married in 1977 and divorced in 2004. He remarried in 
2005. He has two grown children. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1976 and 
attained the rank of first class petty officer (E-6) before being accepted into a 
commissioning program through the medical service corps with a specialty in 
procurement. He was commissioned as a naval officer in May 1984. Applicant holds 
both a bachelor’s and master’s degree.  
 
 In 1977, Applicant went to nonjudicial punishment for shoplifting from the Navy 
Exchange. He was found guilty and punished.1 
 
 In May 1989, Applicant was stationed in the Republic of the Philippines. He was 
a Lieutenant (O-3) at the time and his family accompanied him. While stationed there he 
had two adulterous relationships, each lasting approximately one year. He began a third 
adulterous relationship in 1992 with Woman C. He transferred from the Philippines in 
May 1993. All three of the women Applicant had relationship with were Philippine 
nationals. When Applicant transferred from the Philippines to North Carolina, Woman C 
applied for and was granted a visitor’s visa to the U.S. Applicant continued his 
relationship with her. He paid for her airfare to come to the U.S. in 1993. She moved to 
the same area where Applicant was stationed. She lived with friends while in the U.S. 
and obtained a job.2 Applicant stated he gave her money every now and then. He was 
stationed in North Carolina from 1993-1996.3  
 
In February 1996, Applicant and his family were transferred to California. Woman 
C moved to Texas, but continued her relationship with Applicant by meeting him for 
vacations in New Orleans. Woman C’s visa expired and she remained in the U.S. 
illegally. Applicant was aware that she was in the U.S. illegally. In Woman’s C’s written 
statement she admitted she found it difficult to get a job or have a normal life. She 
wanted to get her green card which would allow her to remain in the U.S. legally and 
travel back to the Philippines to see her family. While living in Texas she told Applicant 
1 Tr. 28-29. 
 
2 It is unclear how she could obtain a job when she was in the U.S. on a visitor’s visa and without 
a green card.  
 
3 Tr. 29-35. 
3 
 
                                                          
she had met somebody that was a U.S. citizen who could help her with her immigration 
problems and that she was dating him and might marry him.4 
 
 During this period of time, Applicant was the financial management officer for a 
Naval Hospital. He had been promoted to Lieutenant Commander (0-4). He stated that 
while on a “smoke break” he asked Seaman J if he would be willing to marry his 
girlfriend. This seaman did not work directly for Applicant, but did work in the hospital. 
Applicant specifically targeted Seaman J, because like Applicant, he was a Filipino. 
Seaman J’s statement reflected that he met Applicant while he was working in the 
human resource department and told him he came into the Navy to go to college. After 
he had known Applicant for about a month, Seaman J’s statement said Applicant called 
him one afternoon and asked him to come to his office after work to discuss something. 
Seaman J agreed and went to his office. They spoke in the work area outside 
Applicant’s office. It was after hours and no other workers were present. Applicant told 
Seaman J that he needed his help and asked him if he wanted to make some money for 
college. Applicant explained he had a girlfriend from the Philippines that needed help 
staying in the U.S. so she could help her family in the Philippines. Applicant advised 
Seaman J that he could make extra money on the side by marrying her and he would 
be entitled to married housing allowance and when he became a U.S. citizen he could 
petition to grant her U.S. citizenship status.5 Applicant asked Seaman J to do this for 
him. Seaman J told Applicant that he did not think it was a good idea, but Applicant 
asked him to think about doing it. About a month later, Applicant contacted Seaman J 
again in his office and asked him if he had been thinking about the offer. Seaman J 
again told him that he had a bad feeling about it and Applicant told him that he should 
trust Applicant. In about March 1996, Seaman J told Applicant that he would help him.6 
 
Applicant told Woman C that he knew a Navy man who would be willing to marry 
her to help with her immigration problems. In early 1996, Woman C flew to California 
and Applicant met her at the airport. He took her to stay with a family he knew.  
 
In approximately April 1996, after Seaman J agreed to help, Applicant contacted 
him and told him he had set a date for Seaman J to marry his girlfriend. Applicant 
picked him up at the barracks and drove to an automatic teller machine. Applicant 
retrieved some money. They then drove to the Officers’ Club and picked up Applicant’s 
girlfriend. The three of them went to the court house and they filled out the paper work 
for a marriage license. Applicant gave Seaman J the money for the license. After 
receiving the license, Applicant then drove them to a wedding chapel and Seaman J 
4 Tr. 36-43, 53- 54; GE 5 and 6. 
 
5 Apparently SN J was not a U.S. citizen.  
 
6 Tr. 18, 35-46, 55-57, GE 5 and 6. I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible when he testified 
that the seaman never expressed any hesitation and he only asked him one time to participate in the 
scheme. This is contrary to Seaman J’s written statement.  
 
4 
 
                                                          
married Woman C. The three then left and Applicant returned Seaman J to his barracks 
and Woman C to the Officers’ Club.7 
 
Approximately a week after Seaman J and Woman C married, Applicant 
contacted Seaman J and told him that Woman C was coming to the hospital to get her 
military dependents identification card and to start the paperwork for the married 
housing allowance. Seaman J met her and she signed the necessary paperwork 
presenting the marriage license. This was the last time Seaman J saw Woman C, his 
wife. Neither intended the other to be an actual marital partner.  
 
In September 1996, Applicant again contacted Seaman J and told him that he 
wanted him to come to his office to talk to him. Seaman J went to Applicant’s office after 
work and Applicant told him that Woman C was coming to live near the base and 
Applicant wanted Seaman J to sign paperwork for an apartment because that would 
make it look as though she and Seaman J were living together. Seaman J agree to do 
this and several days later he went to Applicant’s office after work and Applicant drove 
him to the apartment and he signed the paperwork.  
 
 In early December 1996, Applicant again contacted Seaman J and told him he 
needed $250 for the apartment rent and Seaman J gave him a check for that amount 
drawn on his personal account. This was the only money he paid. Later Applicant called 
him and told him that he was going to put Woman C on Seaman J’s Navy Federal 
Credit Union (NFCU) account, so Seaman J gave him the account number. The next 
day an employee of NFCU contacted Seaman J’s father and advised him that Woman C 
had attempted to put herself on Seaman J’s account.8 Seaman J’s father asked him 
about it and he told him the whole story.9 
 
 Seaman J also stated in his written statement that Applicant had asked him on 
several occasions how his citizenship application was progressing, because he wanted 
Seaman J to apply for citizenship for Woman C’s as soon as he could.10 Applicant 
stated he could not remember if he asked Seaman J to petition for his wife to become a 
U.S. citizen after he did. He stated: “It’s possible, but I don’t remember.”11 
7 Tr. 72; GE 5 and 6. Applicant stated he could not remember if he was the witness at the 
wedding, or that he drove the couple to get married, or that he paid for the marriage license, or that he 
helped Woman C get her military dependents identification card, or that he had Seaman J sign the 
apartment lease. He stated he is not denying that he did those things, he just could not remember. I did 
not find Applicant’s testimony credible.  
 
8 Seaman J’s NFCU’s account was through his father. When NFCU contacted Seaman J’s father 
he was unaware that he had gotten married.  
 
9 Tr. 58-61, 74. Applicant’s testimony was contrary to Seaman J’s statement. Applicant denied 
attempting to put Woman C on Seaman J’s Navy Federal Credit Union account. I did not find his 
testimony credible.  
 
10 GE 5. 
 
11 Tr. 70-72. Applicant stated he could not remember the exact details of some of the issues. 
Although he did not deny that he could have said certain things, he stated he could not recall. 
5 
 
                                                          
 Applicant testified that he was aware of Woman C’s illegal immigration status. He 
admitted he was attempting to have her remain in the country illegally. His relationship 
with her lasted until 1997 when his affair and the scheme were discovered.12 He last 
had contact with her in 1998. He admitted he was not the one to come forward, but the 
offenses were found out when Seaman J’s father reported the offense. Applicant was 
charged with (1) conspiracy to make and present a false claim against the government 
(2) sodomy; (3) making and presenting a fraudulent claim against the government; and 
(4) conduct unbecoming an officer. Applicant pled guilty to the offenses at a court-
martial. He was sentenced to a Dismissal, confinement for six months, a fine of $5,000, 
and a reprimand. On appeal charges (1) and (3) were considered multiplicious with the 
course of conduct in charge (4) and were dismissed. The court found the sentence was 
still appropriate.13 Applicant admitted that he did conspire to defraud the government.14 
 
 Applicant admitted he was investigated in about 1993 for fraudulent use of a 
government credit card. No other evidence was provided to show any offense was 
committed by Applicant. 
 
 Applicant had a security clearance at the time of the offenses. He knew adultery 
was an offense and was aware of his girlfriend’s immigration status and he was 
attempting to thwart the immigration laws.15 Applicant testified he is a changed man and 
no longer a womanizer. Applicant testified he could not remember many of the specifics 
of the acts that he committed as provided in the written statements by Woman C and 
Seaman J. He did not deny his conduct. He is remorseful for his actions. He believes he 
paid for his actions and was disgraced. He has worked in the private sector since 
serving his sentence. He provided character letters from supervisors who knew of his 
past and consider him trustworthy, loyal and competent. He is considered a trusted 
advisor with unparalleled work ethic who is dedicated and eager to accept 
responsibilities, accountability and stewardship of Government funding actions.16  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
12 Tr. 62-64. 
 
13 GE 4. 
 
14 Tr. 59-60 
 
15 Tr. 64. 
 
16 Tr. 20; GE 3. 
6 
 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Paragraph 30 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the trustworthiness concern 
relating to criminal conduct: ACriminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.@ 
 
I have considered all of the criminal conduct disqualifying conditions and 
especially considered AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”); 
(b) (“discharge or dismissal from the Armed Force’s under dishonorable conditions”); 
and (c) (“an allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted”). Applicant conspired 
and perpetrated a fraud on the government to thwart immigration laws. He had 
adulterous relationships while a married man while serving as an officer in the Navy. He 
solicited an enlisted person to commit a fraud on the government through a sham 
marriage. Applicant was court-martialed, went to jail and was dismissed from the Navy. I 
find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply under these facts.  
 
 I have also considered the criminal conduct mitigating conditions and especially 
considered AG 32 ¶ (a) (“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual  circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”) and (d) (“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement”). It has been 11 years since Applicant completed his sentence. 
He has a good job and is a valued employee who is trusted. He is remorseful for his 
actions and stated he is no longer a womanizer. Both of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, 
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; 
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an officer in the Navy, 
married, holding a security clearance, and in a position of trust. He preyed on and 
targeted a young sailor because he was a Filipino and needed money. He arranged a 
sham marriage so his girlfriend, who was in the U.S. illegally, could remain. He 
disregarded the seriousness of the U.S. immigration laws, he abused his position of 
trust as an officer and husband, and through his actions he defrauded the government. 
Applicant’s actions were not a one time occurrence. To the contrary his exploits 
expanded over six years and did not stop until he was eventually caught. He took many 
steps to advance his own personal agenda, including buying the marriage license and 
taking Seaman J and Woman C to the chapel to be married. He then took her to get her 
military dependents identification card, to sign an apartment lease and then attempted 
to place her on Seaman J’s bank account. During Applicant’s continuing course of 
misconduct he held a security clearance and was in a position of trust as an officer and 
the financial officer for a naval hospital. He is remorse for all he lost due to his actions 
and the disgrace he brought to himself and his family. It has been many years since the 
conduct occurred. I have considered all of the issues in mitigation and conclude that 
they do not outweigh the gravity of Applicant’s conduct. He abused his position of trust 
for his personal pleasure; he willingly sacrificed his honor and the trust he was given as 
a naval officer; he repeatedly violated his marital vows with several women over many 
years; it was at his suggestion that a sham marriage occurred and he continued to 
perpetuate the criminal activity involved in it. He took action to have an illegal immigrant 
gain access to benefits afforded to military dependents. He had Seaman J sign for an 
apartment lease and Applicant attempted to have his girlfriend be made a joint owner of 
a bank account. He was the moving force behind all of this criminal conduct. Although 
he is a model employee and a significant period of time has past, it does not outweigh 
his continuing course of misconduct and the years he spent violating those who trusted 
him. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
    
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
