 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18520 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
Bradley P. Moss, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
on (e-QIP), on March 12, 2007. On April 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 8, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on May 20, 2008, and I received the case assignment on May 28, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 5, 2008, scheduling the hearing for July 15, 
2008 at 9 A.M.  On June 10, 2008, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing 
modifying the start time on July 15, 2008 from 9 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. The government submitted a List of Government Exhibits, 
Exhibit (Ex.) III. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were 
received without objection, and testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until July 25, 2008 to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE K and L 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2008.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a Motion to Amend the Statement of Reasons 
(Ex. I) dated July 14, 2008, adding the following allegation under Guideline F: 
 
1.h. On or about March 20, 2008, a federal tax lien was filed against you 
in the [County Court House], in the approximate amount of $17,636.00. 
As of July 17, 2008, this debt has not been paid. 
 
Counsel for Applicant submitted a Response to Motion to Amend the Statement 
of Reasons and Answer to Amended Statement of Reasons (Ex. II) dated July 14, 
2008. Counsel for Applicant did not object to the Government’s Motion to Amend. 
Through Counsel for Applicant, Applicant admitted the first sentence, and denied the 
second sentence in that the debt has been partially paid. During the hearing, I granted 
the Government’s Motion to Amend. Tr. 9-11. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His denials with 
explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old engineer, who has worked for his defense contractor 
employer since October 2006. GE 1, Tr. 30. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. Tr. 56. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1994. Tr. 99. He did not pursue 
higher education. He has never married and has no dependents. GE1. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his March 2007 e-QIP, his January 2008 Response to DOHA 
Financial Interrogatory, his April 2007 and July 2008 credit reports, and March 2008 
federal tax lien record. GE 1 – 5.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified eight separate line items, which included two 
judgments, four collection accounts, one charged off account, and one federal tax lien 
for a total of $27,931 (excluding SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.g.). Two of the debts are duplicates, 
i.e. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.g.; 1.b. and 1.c., thus reducing the number of valid debts from 
eight to six. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.h.) 
 
Applicant provided the following explanation regarding the genesis of his 
financial problems and his solution for solving those problems: 
 
The debts in this SOR were largely accumulated between 2000 and 
2003 when I was young, single and lacking steady, good-paying work. 
Between 2003 and early 2006, I stabilized my professional career but my 
annual salary did not exceed $30,000 and I was unable to pay off the 
debts. 
 
Since I joined my current company, [defense contractor], in October 
2006, I have further stabilized my professional, financial, and social life. I 
have made steady progress at [defense contractor] and continue to play 
a more integral role within the company. My annual salary has grown 
consistent with the rise in my responsibilities, amounting to $57,000 in 
2007 and expected to rise considerably beyond that in 2008. Equally 
important, I currently live with my girlfriend of five (5) years, resulting in 
additional savings by dividing up our living expenses. 
 
While I recognize that youthful ignorance is no excuse for my earlier 
financial miscues, I believe I have demonstrated that I left behind any 
vestiges of a financially-unsustainable lifestyle long ago. I have taken 
control of all aspects of my life and have put myself on a steady footing 
to advance. In light of that, I believe any concerns surrounding my past 
financial issues have been more than sufficiently mitigated and that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States 
that I be granted a security clearance. Response to SOR 
 
In response to a question from his counsel about what he had learned with 
respect to his finances, Applicant said: 
 
Well, I’ve learned that it has a lot to do with my relationship. I never had 
a situation where I saw I was interested in having things and I needed a 
 
4 
 
 
future, thinking house, family, that sort of portion of life I’d like to possibly 
be able to live. 
 
And so, I’ve learned that, you know, it was just being immature and not 
taking responsibility for a lot of my actions. I, I don’t know how to, how to 
explain any better, but just the want to have a different side of life that I 
couldn’t create living that style of life, and it – that’s been the biggest 
motivating factor has been the sight of a future and understanding what 
I’m working for. 
 
I’m not a money-motivated individual, but I understand that if that’s what 
it takes, then you structure your life in that way so that you can have 
some of the things that you want, then so be it. And I understand that, 
and that’s the biggest thing I’ve learned. Tr. 67-68. 
 
Since his SOR was issued, Applicant has paid off and/or settled debts 
indentified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g., excluding 1.d. and 1.g., which are duplicates 
as noted supra. He paid/settled those debts in April 2008, three full months before his 
hearing date. He contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to address his federal 
tax liability identified in SOR ¶ 1.h., and established a payment plan of $259 per 
month. He is current on his payments to the IRS. Response to SOR, containing Exs. A 
– F. , Tr. 86-99. 
 
Applicant submitted a comprehensive budget reflecting a net monthly 
remainder of $1,683 after all his debts were paid. He has a 401k account which he 
opened in January 2008, and a savings account reflecting a balance of $1,932. AE K. 
 
Applicant provided five favorable reference-related documents. i.e. three e-
mails from clients/customers, and two personal references. AE G – J, AE L. 
Applicant’s girlfriend testified on his behalf and provided favorable information about 
his character. Tr. 40-50. The President and Owner of Applicant’s company testified on 
his behalf and also provided favorable information about him. He stated Applicant was 
the “best engineer” he has ever had when comparing him to 200 to 300 engineers 
over the last 20 years. Tr. 23-39. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 The Government established that Applicant owed the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶1.a. – 1.b., 1.d. – 1.f., and 1.h. Applicant acknowledged he made poor financial 
decisions earlier in his life, especially at a time when he was underemployed. Not 
earning enough money to meet his day-to-day bills, he fell into a trap many individuals 
have and that is he lived off of or supplemented his income with credit cards. His lack 
of income also precluded him from paying his income taxes when due.  
 
His financial situation has substantially improved as a result of earning more 
income, maturity, and the realization that his failure to handle his finances responsibly 
may jeopardize his ability to obtain and maintain a security clearance. Since receiving 
his SOR in April 2008, he has taken this process quite seriously and taken what 
appears to be all reasonable steps to correct his financial situation. He has settled 
and/or paid all debts alleged in the SOR except his federal tax debt. For that debt, he 
has contacted the IRS, set up a monthly payment plan, and is current. His monthly 
budget reflects a net remainder of $1,683 after his bills are paid. What is different now 
as opposed to before is he has the means, tools and resolve to achieve financial 
stability. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline F by showing Applicant 
owed the debts as alleged, except as noted, by the evidence presented. At the time 
the SOR was issued in April 2008, Applicant owed six debts totaling $27,931. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20, there are two potentially mitigating conditions: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 I am able to apply partial credit under ¶ 20(b) because at the time Applicant 
incurred the debts, he was underemployed and experienced a business downturn, but 
question the level of responsibility Applicant exercised at the time. I am able to apply 
full credit under ¶ 20(d) because Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. In short, Applicant has turned his 
financial situation around. He has established a viable budget, which shows a net 
remainder after he has paid his bills, and is able to save money. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.h.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
