 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16402 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire,  Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  Kristen E. Ittig, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Foreign  
Influence adjudicative guideline.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 25, 2006, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-Qip). On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 14, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on July 18, 2008.  
I convened a hearing on August 25, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses, introduced two exhibits (Ex. 1 and 2), and offered 
facts found in six official documents of the U.S. Government for administrative notice. 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.)  Ex. 1 and Ex. 2 were admitted without objection.  I took notice 
of HE 1.  
 
Applicant testified on this own behalf and called no witnesses. At the hearing, he 
introduced six exhibits, which were identified as Ex. A, B, C, D, E, and F and admitted 
without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, at Applicant’s request, I held the 
record open until close of business September 2, 2008 so that Applicant could provide 
supplemental information in response to the amended SOR and additional facts for 
administrative notice.  Applicant timely filed a response to the amended SOR, which I 
marked as Ex. G and admitted to the record without objection. He also filed a document 
containing facts about the People’s Republic of China (China) which were drawn from 
HE 1. Applicant’s facts for administrative notice were marked HE 2 and included in the 
record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (TR) of the hearing on 
September 8, 2008. 
 
                                                     Evidentiary  Ruling 
 
 At the conclusion of the evidence, Department Counsel moved, pursuant to DoD 
Directive, Enclosure 3, E3.1.17, to amend the SOR to conform with facts elucidated at 
the hearing.  Specifically, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding the 
following allegations: 
 
1.d.  Your spouse is a citizen of China residing with you in the United 
States. 
 
1.e.  Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and 
residents of China.  
 
 Applicant did not object to amending the SOR to include the new allegations 1.d. 
and 1.e.  He requested additional time to provide supplementary information in 
response to the new allegations.  Applicant’s request was approved, and Department 
Counsel’s  motion to amend the SOR was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG B, 
Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In his Answer to the SOR and in his 
testimony, Applicant admitted all five allegations in the amended SOR and provided 
additional information.  Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and employed as a computer programmer by a 
government contractor. Applicant was born in China and received a bachelor of science 
degree in telecommunications from a university in China.  In 1987, he came to the U.S. 
on a student visa. He brought with him US $3,000, which his parents and brother had 
given him to help with his expenses. He studied at a university for one semester.  He 
left and attended English classes at a second university for one year.  He studied at a 
third university and pursued a master’s degree in computer science.  After he found a 
job, he left the university and did not continue his studies.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 56-58, 67, 71, 76, 
78.)  
 
 In 1996, Applicant married a woman who was a citizen of China and residing in 
the U.S. The couple was divorced in April 2001.  Later, at a Chinese New Year’s party 
he attended in the U.S., Applicant met another woman who was a Chinese citizen and 
residing in the U.S. as a student.  Applicant and the woman were married in June 2006, 
and they are the parents of a child born in October 2007.1 Applicant’s wife is employed 
as an administrative assistant and accountant.  She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship 
when she is eligible to do so.  (Ex. 1; Ex. G; Tr. 43-45, 65, 68-69.) 
 
   In 2000, when he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant changed his first 
name and his surname. He elected to use an English language first name and an 
English language noun in place of his Chinese surname. (Ex. 1; Tr. 59-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, and brother are citizens and residents of China.  His 
parents are 82 and 78 years old. Applicant’s father is retired from a Chinese 
government agency and receives retirement benefits based on his service to that 
agency.  Applicant’s brother owns a computer support business.  Applicant’s bother’s 
wife teaches at a college in China.  Applicant speaks with his parents by telephone once 
a month. He also speaks with his brother by telephone about once a month.  Applicant’s 
parents came to the U.S. to visit him in 1999, 2001, and 2003.  (Tr. 37-39, 52-55, 61.) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from June 2001 to August 2002.  His unemployed 
status caused him to feel frustrated and hopeless.  In January 2002, he traveled to 
China to visit his parents.  He remained in China with his parents until May 2002.  In 
2003, Applicant used his one-month vacation to travel back to China with his parents, 
who had been visiting him in the U.S.  In 2005, Applicant traveled again to China to visit 
his parents.  (Answer to SOR; Tr. 40-41.)  
 
 
1 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator in January 2007. The investigator sought 
information about Applicant’s foreign relatives.  In that interview, Applicant discussed his relationship with 
his former spouse, his parents, and his brother.  However, the subject interview does not mention 
Applicant’s second wife or the fact that Applicant married her approximately six months before the 
interview took place. (Ex. 2.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and 
residents of China.  Applicant’s father-in-law is 65 years old and retired from work in real 
estate. His mother-in-law is 60 years old and a retired accountant. Neither of Applicant’s 
parents-in-law worked for businesses owned by the Chinese government.  Applicant’s 
wife speaks with her parents in China by telephone about once a month. (Ex. G at 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s sister is 36 years old and employed as an accountant by a 
water processing company.  Her husband works as an accountant for a utility company.  
Neither company is owned by the Chinese government. (Ex. G at 2.) 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant and his wife traveled to China to visit their parents and 
siblings.  Applicant’s wife traveled on her Chinese passport.  Applicant, his wife, and 
child stayed in the home of his parents-in-law when they were in China.  Because his 
parents are growing too old to travel to the U.S., Applicant plans to visit them in China in 
the future.  (Tr. 45-47, 80.) 
 
 Applicant has no investments in China and owns no property there.  He owns two 
condominiums in the U.S.  He estimated the value of one condominium at $220,000, 
and he estimated the value of the second condominium at $335,000.  He has two 
401(k) plans, with assets totaling $70,000.  (Tr. 64.) 
 
 Applicant’s employer, chief executive officer, and several senior managers 
provided letters of character reference for Applicant.  They attested to Applicant’s good 
character, dedication to his duties, professionalism, and trustworthiness.  (Ex. A; Ex. B; 
Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about China which appear in 
official U.S. government publications: 
 
 China has a population of over a billion people and is a large and economically 
powerful country.  The United States is China’s second-largest trading partner, and 
China is the United States’ third-largest trading partner.  The Chinese Communist Party 
dominates the country’s authoritarian government.  China possesses a sophisticated 
military apparatus and strategic nuclear weapons and missiles.  (HR 1; HR 2.) 
 
 State Department documents chronicle China’s poor human rights practices: 
suppression of dissent, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture, forced confessions, and 
the mistreatment of prisoners. According to the Department of State publication Country 
Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2007 China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and 
Macau,“[Chinese] authorities monitored telephone conversations, facsimile 
transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communications.  Authorities also 
opened and censored domestic and international mail.  The security services routinely 
monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, 
and fax machines.”  (HR 1.)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The U.S. and China have been rivals since the Cold War and disagree on the 
status of Taiwan.  China resists what it considers to be the superpower dominance of 
the U.S.  The Intelligence Threat Handbook states: “The United States is a primary 
intelligence target of [China] because of the U.S. role as a global superpower, its 
substantial military, political, and economic presence in the Pacific Rim and Asia; its role 
as a developer of advanced technology that China requires for economic growth; and 
the large number of Americans of Chinese ancestry, who are considered prime 
intelligence targets by [China].” (HR 1: Interagency Operations Security Information 
Series (OPSEC) Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official 
Use Only], dated June 2004 at 17.) 
 
 The Intelligence Threat Handbook provides the following additional assessments: 
                             
The primary operational focus of MSS [China’s Ministry of State Security]  
is “Taiwan work,” namely conducting intelligence activities against Taiwan 
in every intelligence and covert political action area.  To accomplish its 
objectives, the MSS also is heavily involved in assessing, developing, and 
recruiting ethnic Chinese targets. This ethnic recruitment approach to 
solving intelligence challenges is so pronounced that the Chinese-
American community, (which is no more than one percent of the total U.S. 
population) is the target of an estimated 98 percent of MSS agent 
recruitment efforts. 
                                            * * * * * * * * * * *   
[T]he selling point in a normal [Chinese] recruitment operation is not an 
appeal to ethnicity per se, but to whatever feelings of obligation the 
targeted individual may have towards China, family members in China, old 
friends in China, etc.  The crux of [China’s] approach is not to try to exploit 
a perceived vulnerability but to appeal to an individual’s desire to help 
China out in some way.  Whatever the reason, ethnic targeting to arouse 
feelings of obligation is the single most distinctive feature of [China’s] 
intelligence operations.  [footnote omitted.]   
 
(HR. 1: Intelligence Threat Handbook, Overview, 20-21.)  
 
 The U.S. State Department also reports that Chinese security agents “may at 
times place foreign visitors under surveillance.  Hotel rooms, telephones, and fax 
machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel rooms, including 
computers, may be searched without consent or knowledge of the traveler.” 
Additionally, “Americans in China, who are not staying at hotels, including Americans 
who are staying with friends or relatives, must register with local police as soon as they 
arrive.” (H.R. 1: U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information – China, dated 
December 10, 2007, at 2, 9.)  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative  judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
6 
 
 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 7(a), AG ¶ 7(b), and AG ¶7(d).2  
 
 The United States is a primary intelligence target of China, and China seeks to 
recruit U.S. citizens of Chinese origin in its efforts to obtain classified information, a 
situation that threatens U.S. security interests.  American citizens with immediate family 
members who are citizens or residents of China could be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, and brother are citizens and residents of China.  
Applicant’ mother-in-law, father-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of 
China. Applicant has a close familial relationship with his parents and brother. He 
speaks with his parents on the telephone once a month. He traveled to China to visit his 
parents and brother in 2002, 2003, 2005, and 2008.  He will likely travel again to China 
to visit his parents, since they believe they are too old to travel to the U.S. to visit him 
and his family.  These facts raise a security concern under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 Applicant’s father is retired from an agency of the Chinese government. 
Applicant’s familial connection with his father and his father’s former employment by the 
Chinese government could create a conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to help a foreign person or 
group in China by providing that information.  Additionally, the potential for a conflict of 
interest could arise from Applicant’s contacts with other family members who are 
citizens and residents of China.  This raises a security concern under AG ¶ 7(b).   
 
 Applicant’s wife, a citizen of China, shares his home. She too has a close 
relationship with her parents and sister, who are residents and citizens of China.  She 
 
2 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
8 
 
 
speaks with them regularly by telephone, and, in April 2008, she traveled with Applicant 
to visit her parents and his parents in China.  These facts also raise security concerns 
under AG 7(d). 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
  
Applicant’s relationships with his wife, parents, brother, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, and sister-in-law are not casual, and his contacts with them are frequent. His 
relationships are based on long-standing family ties of affection and obligation.  
Applicant is a devoted husband and dutiful son and son-in-law.  These close 
relationships raise a heightened risk that Applicant could be targeted for exploitation, 
pressure, or coercion by the government of China in ways that might also threaten U.S. 
security interests.  
 
Applicant offered no evidence to rebut the Government’s assertion that his 
contacts with his wife, a citizen of China, and his family members and in-laws who are 
citizens and residents of China created a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant’s relationships with his 
family members who are citizens of China could force him to choose between loyalty to 
members of his family and the security interests of the United States.  (ISCR Case No. 
03-15485, at 4-6 (App. Bd. June 2, 2005)   I conclude that the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a mature adult of 50 years of age. He is a college graduate. Over the 
course of his adult life, he has been a solicitous and devoted son. He is also a devoted 
husband, son-in-law, and father.  
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in China. He has numerous immediate 
family contacts with China.  His wife, with whom he lives and shares a household, is a 
citizen of China.  His parents and brother are citizens and residents of China. His father 
is retired from a position in a Chinese government agency. Applicant’s father-in-law, 
mother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of China.  
 
Americans of Chinese ancestry are considered prime intelligence targets by the 
Chinese government.  Applicant has traveled to China four times in the past six years, 
thereby exposing himself to the possibility of exploitation, pressure, or exploitation by 
the Chinese government. Because he is a dutiful son, and because his parents are 
growing too old to travel to the U.S. to visit him, Applicant anticipates that he will travel 
to China in the future to visit his parents. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under AG  B.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
