 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-15024 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations 
and Personal Conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on February 22, 2007. On April 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 13, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on May 22, 2008, and I received the case assignment on May 28, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 6, 2008, scheduling the hearing for June 24, 
2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, identified by 
List of Government Exhibits (Ex. I), which were received without objection. Applicant 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received without objection, 
and testified on his own behalf.   
 
I held the record open until August 8, 2008 to afford Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE G and H, without 
objection, which were forwarded to me by Department Counsel by Memorandum, 
dated August 7, 2008 (Ex. II). By e-mail dated August 8, 2008, Applicant requested an 
extension of the August 8, 2008 deadline. Without objection from Department 
Counsel, I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until August 19, 2008 
(Ex. III). Applicant submitted AE I and AE J without objection on August 14, 2008. 
Applicant submitted AE K without objection, which was forwarded to me by 
Department Counsel by Memorandum, dated August 19, 2008 (Ex. IV). DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2008. The record closed on August 
19, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old old computer operator, who has been employed by 
his defense contractor employer since July 2003. GE 1, Tr. 20-21. He seeks to renew 
his security clearance, which was previously granted while serving in the U.S. Air 
Force and was transferred to his current employment. Applicant believes retaining a 
clearance is a condition of his continued employment. Tr. 21-22, 35. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1980. Tr. 19. He served in the Air 
Force from June 1982 to August 2002, and retired as a Staff Sergeant (pay grade E-
5). His Air Force Specialty Code was 250X2 – Supply Systems Analyst. GE 1, Tr. 16-
19. Applicant successfully held a secret clearance while in the Air Force for his last 18 
years of active duty. Tr. 21-23. Applicant has never been married, and has no 
dependents. GE 1, Tr. 16. Applicant estimates that he has completed 12 college credit 
hours. Tr. 20. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
personal conduct which included the review of his February 2007 e-QIP, his April 2008 
 
3 
 
 
and March 2007 credit bureau reports, and his February 2008 Responses to 
Interrogatories. GE 1 – 4. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified four separate line items consisting of two collection 
accounts and two charged off accounts totaling $27,423. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. - 1.d.) All of 
these debts are credit card accounts. Tr. 31. Applicant retained the services of a credit 
counseling service, received financial counseling, and established a debt 
consolidation program. His credit counseling service contacted all of his creditors, 
established a single monthly minimum payment for Applicant, which he pays to his 
credit counseling service by direct debit. AE G. Before he retained the services of a 
credit counseling service, Applicant was attempting to pay off his creditors in a piece 
meal fashion, which he found inefficient and costly. Tr. 36-40, 44-54. In short, he has 
resolved all debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to loss of income when he retired 
from the Air Force, a move, and underemployment. He explained while the Air Force a 
significant portion of his pay was tax free. Upon retiring from the Air Force he also 
incurred medical expenses he did not previously have as a result of paying for health 
insurance and co-pays. After he retired, he moved to an area not served by a military 
treatment facility and had to seek medical care outside of the military health care 
system. He also acknowledged he fell prey to easy credit and was not a good money 
manager. Answer to SOR, Tr. 59-62. 
 
Applicant has established a budget with the assistance of his credit counseling 
service, which reflects a net monthly remainder of $253 after he has paid all of his 
monthly bills. His credit counseling service developed a comprehensive plan to 
achieve financial stability to include an estimated payoff and savings plan, creditor 
summary, spending assessment, and personal action plan. AE H.  
 
When Applicant completed his February 2007 e-QIP SF-86, he failed to provide 
correct answers relating to financial delinquencies over 180 days in the last seven 
years, and financial delinquencies currently over 90 days delinquent. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. 
and 2.b.)  
 
When queried about his incorrect answers, he responded “as stated in the 
[Answer to SOR], that was my own stupid mistake. Stupidity on my part.” Tr. 56. 
Applicant stated that he did not pull his credit report before completing his e-QIP. Tr. 
56-57. Four months later in July 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) Investigator and freely acknowledged to that 
Investigator after reviewing his credit report that his answers on his e-QIP were 
incorrect. Answer to SOR, Tr. 76-77. 
 
Applicant provided a reference letter from one of his company managers, who 
said, “[Applicant] also demonstrated honesty, reliability and proved to be very 
dependable while performing his daily duties.” Referring to the position Applicant fills, 
“The position is one of our highest positions of trust within the government operations 
 
4 
 
 
for this particular contract for [Government agency].” Adding, “I can confirm that 
[Applicant] is a man of great integrity, trustworthiness, and is extremely dedicated to 
his family and work.” AE D. Applicant submitted his last three years of work 
performance evaluations reflecting consistent above average performance. AE E. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial considerations concerns were established by his 
admissions and the Government’s evidence. Applicant’s financial difficulties stem from 
underemployment, difficulty in making the financial adjustment of active duty pay to 
private sector pay, uncovered health care costs, and mismanagement. 
  
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG ¶ 
19, two are applicable:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant demonstrated that whatever financial difficulties he encountered 
transitioning from active duty Air Force life to private sector life are behind him. His 
underemployment no doubt created part of his financial difficulties. His current job and 
Air Force retirement provide him sufficient income to meet his financial obligations. 
Also, he had the good sense to seek the services of a competent and reputable 
financial counseling service, which guided him through the process of achieving 
financial stability. His debts although not paid in full are being paid in a timely and 
predictable manner. After all of his monthly payments are made, he has a net monthly 
remainder of $253. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude three of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are applicable or 
partially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG & 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during 
the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
Of the seven Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16, two 
are applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
1 See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group.  
 
Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of his 
financial delinquencies from his February 2007 e-QIP. His omissions are attributable 
to his misunderstanding of the question asked and carelessness. Having observed 
Applicant’s demeanor and the forthright assessment of his failure to exercise greater 
care in responding to these questions and character evidence suggests his behavior 
was not intentional. I also note when he was questioned by the OPM Investigator four 
months after he completed his e-QUIP, he freely acknowledged his failure to provide 
accurate information about his financial indebtedness. 
 
I found Applicant to be credible and acted in good faith. While he could 
reasonably have been expected to be more diligent when answering questions 
regarding financial delinquencies, his judgment lapses and inattention to detail are not 
enough to impute knowing and willful falsification under Guideline E. There being no 
misconduct substantiated, there is no need to discuss Personal Conduct Mitigating 
Conditions.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”2 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.d.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a. -2.b.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
