1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )            ISCR Case No. 07-12857
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 15, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on October 30,
2006. On February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) with attachments, in writing on March
7, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was
assigned to this Administrative Judge on June 24, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on July 9, 2008, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 12,
2008, in Honolulu, Hawaii. The government offered Exhibits 1 through 9, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A and B, which were entered into evidence without objection. DOHA received the
2
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on August 29, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 45 years old. He is currently married for the second time, and he has
five children. He served in the United States Marines from 1979 to 2000, and he
received an Honorable Discharge.
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists five allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.e., under
Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the debts will be discussed in the same order as they
were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $235. In
his RSOR and during his testimony, Applicant argued that he has disputed this bill for a
converter cable box, as he returned the box at the time. Attachment A of the RSOR
shows a receipt from this creditor, indicating that this converter box was received on
September 15, 2001. Attachment B is part of a Consumer Credit Report, showing that
Applicant has disputed this bill to the credit reporting agency.
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $17,260.
Applicant explained during his testimony that there were several reasons why this bill for
child support became overdue. He stated that the bill started out with it being $3,500 in
arrears, because the child support agency took such a long time telling him how much
he should be paying. Then the amount he was ordered to pay did not reduce the
arrearage which continued to grow. He also paid for the first two years, but he did not
get credit for those payments
Applicant testified that he has never missed making every required monthly
payment, since he was first ordered to pay for child support. He has been making two
payments a month, both the one that is required each month and a second payment to
reduce the arrearage, which Applicant stated has been educed to $14,000. Exhibit 5
shows the two monthly payments that had been $585 and were reduced after he retired
to  $345 that Applicant has been paying on this debt. He is now paying $210 a month to
reduce the arrearage. 
3
Finally, he testified that he planned to refinance his home in March or April of
2009, and use the proceeds to pay off the arrearage. 
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,420.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had been disputing this bill from a phone
company, which he did not believe was accurate. He testified that even though he did
not believe this bill was accurate, he did pay this bill. Exhibit B is a letter from the
attorneys for this creditor, dated March 19, 2008, indicating that they have received
$1,320 on March 12, 2008, as payment in full on this debt.  I conclude that this debt has
been paid in full. 
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $30.
Applicant testified that this debt and the debt marked as 1.e., below were for co-
payments that were supposed to be paid by his former wife. However, since she did not
meet her obligation, he has now paid this debt. Exhibit A is a letter from the collection
agency of the creditor of this debt, dated June 24, 2008, indicating that they have
received $60 on April 21, 2008, as payment in full on this debt, and the debt which is
listed below as 1.e.  I conclude that this debt has been paid in full.  
 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $30. As
discussed in 1.d., above, this debt has also been paid in full. 
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a. Applicant executed a signed SCA on October 30, 2006 (Exhibit 1).  Question
28.a. asks, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any
debt(s)?” Question 28.b. asks, “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any
debt(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to both of these questions, and he listed no debts.
The Government alleges that Applicant should have included the debts listed as 1.a.
through 1.e., discussed above in the SOR.
Applicant testified that he believed he was current on all of his debts or else that
he was legitimately disputing them, and that he did not consider himself overdue on his
debts when he completed the SCA.  He had no intention of giving false or incorrect
information to the Government when he completed the SCA.
Applicant explained that with the exception of the child support bill, he is current
on all of his debts. His previous financial difficulties were incurred because of his divorce
and the child support arrearage which arose through no fault of Applicant. He testified
that he was able to purchase a home in March of 2008 for $400,000, and he is making
monthly payments of $2,699 a month. He has not missed any payments on his
mortgage.  
Finally, two witnesses testified at the hearing on Applicant’s behalf.  One has
known Applicant since the early 1980s during their active duty in the Marines. He is now
Applicant’s immediate supervisor. He described Applicant as forthright, and trustworthy,
and he stated that Applicant does his job impeccably.  The second witness has known
4
Applicant since1979 during their active duty in the Marines. He is now a coworker of
Applicant. He described the Applicant as a “stand up gentleman” who is honest and
trustworthy. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
Regarding the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline F, I conclude both
DC (a) and DC (c) apply, because of Applicant’s history of not meeting financial
obligations and his inability or unwillingness to satisfy his debts. 
I find that Mitigating Condition (MC) (d) applies as Applicant has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay the overdue creditors and resolve his debts, with only one debt that
remains outstanding. Additionally, I find that the debt arose due to errors made by the
child support agency. Not only did Applicant never miss a child support payment, but he
actually paid child support for the first two years before he was ordered to do so, and he
never received credit for those two years of payment. I, therefore, hold Guideline F for
Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant did not
knowingly provide incorrect material information to the Government on the SCA that he
executed on October 30, 2006. Of the five debts cited on the SOR, Applicant had a
legitimated dispute with two, and he did know that his wife had not paid the other two,
despite her agreement to do so. While the child support bill can be considered overdue,
Applicant did not create this situation, and he believed it was being resolved.  I find that
Applicant did not intend to mislead the Government.
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that no DC applies against
Applicant. I therefore, resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s 20 year history in the
Marines, the testimony of his two character witnesses, his resolution of all of his
overdue debts except one, which he is working diligently to resolve, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For  Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
