                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14101 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Edward J. Tolchin, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on October 7, 2005.  On June 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
Applicant under Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 16, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on June 17, 2008, admitting all factual allegations in the SOR, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department counsel was prepared 
to proceed on July 31, 2008, and I was assigned the case on August 4, 2008.  DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 3, 2008.  The government offered four exhibits, marked 
Government Exhibit (Gov. Ex.) 1-4, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
submitted 51 Applicant Exhibits, marked App. Ex.s A through YY, which were received 
without objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 12, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request for administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Taiwan. (Tr. 14)  The request and the supporting documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I.  
Applicant had no objection to the request for administrative notice and the attached 
documents.  The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanation.   
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old program manager for a defense contractor.  He was 
born in Taiwan and received his early education, including his bachelor's degree in 
mathematics, in Taiwan.  He completed his compulsory military service required by 
Taiwan of its male citizens as a second lieutenant but did not hold a security clearance.  
After college, he worked for a Taiwan bank for a year before coming to the United 
States in 1975 at age 27 to further his education.  He received a master's degree in 
mathematics in 1976 from a United States university.  He attended another United 
States university where he received both a master's degree and a doctorate in 
operations research in 1979.  He then taught in the field of Information Systems at 
another United States university for three years.  
 
He was accepted for a position in software development at a nationally 
recognized research and development laboratory in 1983.  He worked for the laboratory 
for the next 22 years and retired in 2004 as the Program Director for business services 
for the laboratory.  He did spend one year during this time working for a prominent 
United States airline as their director of operations research.  His family did not move so 
Applicant only took this position for one year (Tr. 23-31, 80-81; Gov. Ex. 2, 
Interrogatories, dated November 24, 2007; App. Ex. YY, Resume, undated). 
 
He is now employed as a program manager for a company that has government 
contracts.  He has worked on various government projects for the company.  He is now 
the program manager for a contract working on computer projects for a major military 
hospital which requires a security clearance.  He previously served as the program 
director and United States representative on a project for the contractor for the United 
 
3 
 
 
States Navy providing training services to Taiwan which did not require a security 
clearance (Tr. 32-33, 83-84). 
 
Applicant has received many awards for his work with the laboratory, including 
the highest award in the field of operations research (Tr. 35-41; App. Exs. A-C and WW, 
list of awards and citations, various dates).  Applicant contributed in many innovations 
and projects with the laboratory (Tr. 34-38; App. Exs. D-I, K-N, yearly accomplishments 
and ratings, various dates).  His work for his present government contractor employer 
has also been exceptional (App. Ex. J, Rating, undated).   
 
Applicant's wife was also born in Taiwan and is 56 years old.  They were married 
in the United States in 1977 and both became United States citizens in 1987.  They 
have lived in the same house near the location of the laboratory since 1984.  His wife 
has been employed as a computer programmer at the same laboratory for over 23 
years.  They do not discuss their work with each other.  Applicant's wife still has a 
current Taiwanese passport.  Applicant does not know if she is considered a dual citizen 
of Taiwan or why she still has her Taiwanese passport.  They have three children who 
are all citizens and residents of the United States.  Two have left the house and are 
working and the third is a college student.  Applicant was the first Chinese-American to 
run for a local public office and served seven years on his community's school board.  
During his tenure on the school board, he twice served at the request of his town's 
mayor as the host of delegations from the People's Republic of China looking at local 
government management.  He ran for a seat on the local governing council but was not 
elected.  He has limited contact with former classmates or friends in Taiwan (Tr. 33-35, 
47-50, 83-85, 88-89; Gov. Ex. 1, E-QIP, dated October 7, 2005). 
 
Applicant has extensive funds and holdings in the United States.  He also owns 
his home and two rental properties and has no debt.  His investments and properties 
have a net worth of about $5.4 million.  He pays taxes which are current and draws 
social security each month (Tr. 62-72; App Exs. O-II, Statements of investments, 
various dates; App. Exs. JJ-LL, Property taxes on house and rental property, various 
dates; App Exs, MM-PP, Social Security payments, various dates). 
 
Applicant also has financial holdings and real estate in Taiwan.  In 1982 when his 
brother-in-law in Taiwan started a software development company, he was asked to 
invest in the company.  He did invest and the funds were held by a brokerage company 
in Taiwan.  He left the funds with the brokerage company and the investment is now 
worth about $650,000.  He does not control the funds and permits the brokerage 
company to manage the assets.  The brokerage company has the funds in stock in 
companies that are publicly traded in Taiwan.  Some of the companies are also traded 
in the United States.  He does pay taxes to Taiwan as required by law on the 
investments (Tr. 52-57; Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated November 24, 2007; Gov. Ex. 
3, Interrogatories, undated; App. Exs. RR-UU, Brokerage firm statements, various 
dates).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant's father purchased a piece of farm land in June 1973 for approximately 
$50,000 with five other investors.  Since Applicant was his first born son, the father's 
share of the property was placed in his name.  Applicant did not know of the property or 
his ownership rights until recently.  The government at some time divided the property in 
half by using part for a highway right of way.  The value of the property is now $10,000 
and Applicant owns 23% of that value.  He has not sold his share because it would 
require the concurrence of the other investors or their successors.  He does not pay 
taxes on the property and he does not know if his mother pays taxes on the property 
(Tr. 57-61, 71-72, 87-88; Gov. Ex. 3, Interrogatories, undated; Applicant Exhibits VV-
WW, land contract, undated). 
 
Applicant visited Taiwan in 2001 for his mother's 80th birthday celebration. He 
traveled to Taiwan in 2004 because of a special deal offered by the Taiwanese airline.  
As part of the arrangement, he was required to obtain a Taiwanese passport and vote in 
the Taiwan elections that year.  He traveled on the Taiwanese passport and voted in the 
Taiwanese presidential election.  On return to the United States, he relinquished his 
Taiwanese passport to the Taiwanese consulate in the United States.  He also traveled 
to Taiwan four times in 2005-2006 and twice in 2007 as part of his duties with his 
employer to provide training support to Taiwan using his United States passport.  Other 
than his contacts with Taiwanese officials when working as the United States 
government representative on the Navy training support contract, he had no contact 
with Taiwanese government officials.  He does have some limited contact with former 
friends from Taiwan (Tr. 50-52, 82-83; See, Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated 
November 24, 2007, at 5; Gov. Ex. 4, Testimony, dated January 4, 2007).   
 
Applicant’s mother is a resident and citizen of Taiwan living with Applicant's 
brother and his wife in an apartment owned by his mother.  She is 89 years old and has 
been retired for over 30 years from her employment at the Taiwan national bank.  His 
father served in a government capacity in a position similar to a Senator for over 49 
years before he died over 20 years ago.  His mother draws a pension from her own 
employment with the bank and from her husband's work as a government employee.  
She also has health coverage through the national health plan.  His mother has visited 
him in the United States but returned to Taiwan because of difficulties with culture and 
language in the United States.  He talks to her almost weekly and they have a strong 
loving relationship.  Their conversations are fun loving like he was still her young son.  
He does not provide her any support and does not send her gifts since she is self 
sustaining with the pension payments she receives (Tr. 42-44, 74-78)   
 
Applicant’s brother was educated in the United States and received a doctorate 
in civil engineering from a United States university.  He returned to Taiwan and retired 
as the president of the software development company founded by Applicant's sister's 
husband.  He talks to his brother approximately once a month during one of his 
conversations with his mother (Tr. 44-45, 78-79; Gov. Ex. 4, Testimonies, dated 
January 4, 2007). 
 
 
5 
 
 
One of Applicant’s sisters is a housewife married to the brother-in-law that 
founded the software development company.  She has not been employed but is a 
painter.  Applicant does have telephone contact with his sister (Tr. 45-47).  Applicant 
has another sister in Taiwan who retired about ten years ago after working for the 
United States Consulate in Taiwan.  He husband is a professor at a Taiwan university 
who will retire soon.  Applicant also has periodic telephone contact with her.  Applicant 
also has a sister who has been a resident and citizen of the United States for over 30 
years (Tr. 46-47, 80-81; Gov. Ex. 4, Testimony, dated January 4, 2007).   
 
Applicant's wife's family is mostly in the United States.  Her mother and two 
brothers are citizens and residents of the United States.  She has one brother in Taiwan 
who is an engineer involved in research.  Applicant's wife speaks to her brother in 
Taiwan periodically when she updates him on the condition of their mother.  Applicant 
speaks to this brother-in-law about once a year (Tr. 48-49. 90-91). 
 
 During World War II and after, a civil war was fought on the mainland of China 
between the Chinese Communist Party and the Nationalist Chinese.  In 1949, the 
Chinese Communist Party was victorious and established a government on the 
mainland.  The Nationalist Chinese fled to the island that is now Taiwan and established 
a government.  Taiwan has developed steadily since then and is now the world’s 17th 
largest economy.  Taiwan became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2002, 
further expanding its trade opportunities and further strengthening its standing in the 
global economy.  This prosperity established economic and social stability.   
 
 Until 1986, Taiwan's political system was effectively controlled by one party, the 
Kuomintang.  Since ending martial law in 1987, Taiwan has taken dramatic steps to 
improve respect for human rights and create a democratic political system. The United 
States has been committed to maintaining cultural, commercial, and other nonofficial 
relations with Taiwan since January 1979, when it formally recognized the government 
of the People's Republic of China (PRC) as the sole legal government of China.  By 
formal act of Congress (Taiwan Relations Act of 1979), the United States is committed 
to provide Taiwan with military defensive arms in support of Taiwan's security and 
stability in the region.  The United States also stated it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan.  Despite the United 
States clear and consistent position that Taiwan and the mainland are part of one 
China, United States commercial ties have expanded with Taiwan and the United States 
is supportive of Taiwan's membership in international organizations, such as the World 
Trade Organization and the Asian Development Bank (See Hearing Exhibits, United 
States, Department of State's Background Note: Taiwan, dated March 2008).   
 
While still pursuing a closer relationship with Taiwan, the official United States 
position on Taiwan and mainland China seems to be a criticism of mainland China’s 
buildup opposite Taiwan with periodic cautions and warnings to the effect that United 
States support for Taiwan is not unconditional, but has limits.  Smooth United States 
and PRC relations are an important tool in cooperating against terrorism and 
maintaining stability in the Pacific region.  Faced with competing pressures and the 
 
6 
 
 
continuing transformation on both the PRC and Taiwan systems, the United States 
government may be facing new and more difficult policy choices in the future (See 
Hearing Exhibits, Congressional Research Service Report to Congress: Taiwan: Recent 
Developments and U.S. Policy Choices, dated December 14, 2007). 
 
 The government claims through Administrative Notice that Taiwan poses a threat 
to national security because, in the past, it was one of the countries most actively 
engaged in industrial espionage and the collection of foreign economic information. The 
request cites to the Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage of 2000.  This report lists Taiwan as one of the most active 
collectors of industrial and economic intelligence.  However, the government also 
attached to its request the more recent Annual report from 2005 which was dated 
August 2006.  The report does not list Taiwan as being one of the biggest collectors of 
economic and industrial espionage.  It does list the PRC and Russia as the most active 
collectors.  The report states the United States is targeted by a large number of foreign 
countries for economic and industrial espionage.  The report notes that the foreign 
private sector is the most active collector of this type of economic and industrial 
intelligence, but there is ample evidence that foreign intelligence services and other 
government organizations remain aggressive in collecting information by using the 
private sector to collect information for them and by their own continued direct 
intelligence gathering operations.   
 The report list a number of factors that could cause concern for the United 
States.  Among the concerns are the number of foreign visitors from any country to 
United States sensitive sites, the number of non-immigrant persons from a country that 
are admitted as visitors to the United States, and the number of requests from a country 
for visits to military and defense industry sites.  There are a large number of visitors 
from Taiwan to the United States for business, pleasure, or other purposes.  But Taiwan 
does not send a large number in comparison to other countries of visits to selected 
nuclear sensitive facilities in the United States.  By comparison, the number of request 
for visits to military and defense industry sites by Taiwan jumped ten fold from Fiscal 
Year 2004 to Fiscal Year 2005.  Taiwan does not appear to be any more active in the 
collection of economic and industrial intelligence than many other allied counties. 
 The government also presented information concerning individuals in the United 
States convicted of engaging in espionage practices on behalf of Taiwanese companies 
or officials, as well as companies that violate export control requirements in sending 
items to Taiwan.  Some of these cases involve individuals in the United States, both 
native born and foreign born and both citizens and non-citizens of the United States, 
that formed friendships with Taiwan Intelligence agents and then provided the agents 
with classified information.  While the government presented information only on Taiwan 
cases, it is not difficult to assume that there are cases that pertain to other countries as 
well.  In a case in which a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) employee provided 
classified information to Taiwan, Applicant presented information showing that Taiwan 
did not solicit information from the individual.  In fact, the FBI stated that Taiwan was 
cooperating with it on the investigation (App. Ex. XX, Article, dated August 28, 2008).  
 
7 
 
 
The fact that there are cases of Taiwan intelligence agents accepting intelligence 
information from sources in the United States, no matter how obtained, does raise 
security concerns. 
The government argues that the geographical closeness of Taiwan and the PRC 
causes Taiwan to engage in industrial, military, and economic espionage to ensure that 
they are strong enough to counter threats from the PRC.  It is correct that the closeness 
of the PRC causes Taiwan concern.  However, that threat is counter balanced by the 
need of Taiwan to continue friendly relations with the United States as one of its prime 
protectors and sources of military equipment. The relationship between the United 
States and Taiwan is defined in the Taiwan Relations Act which recognizes Taiwan. 
(Public Law 96-8)  Taiwan has a long history of friendly relations with the United States, 
including substantial levels of foreign trade.  Taiwan is an ally and friend but also poses 
a security threat because of its activities and efforts to obtain economic, industrial, and 
national security information.  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 There is a security concern because foreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interests.  Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity 
of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including but not limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known 
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6) 
 
 Applicant has foreign contact through his mother, brother, two sisters, and 
brother-in-law, who are all citizens and residents of Taiwan.  These contacts raise 
security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC) AG ¶ 7(a) 
(Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion); and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) (Connections to a foreign person, group, government, 
or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information).  Each individual contact by 
itself may not create a risk of foreign influence, but the totality of the contacts may 
indicate a risk of foreign influence.  Applicant's substantial stock holdings in a 
Taiwanese brokerage company and his interest in a piece of land inherited from his 
father raises security concerns under FI DC AG ¶ 7(e) (a substantial business, financial, 
or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated 
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risks of foreign influence or 
exploitation).   
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant resides with his wife in the United States.  Both have been United 
States citizens for over 21 years.  However, Applicant's wife has a brother that is a 
citizen and resident of Taiwan which raises FI DC AG ¶ 7(d) (sharing living quarters with 
a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion).   
 
 The government has established that there is a heightened risk of a security 
concerns because Taiwan does engage in economic and industrial espionage, even 
though there is no evidence that Taiwan targets United States citizens to obtain 
protected information.  Taiwan and its intelligence agents did receive protected 
information from persons in the United States but in these cases the information was 
offered to the agents by the United States citizens rather than Taiwan targeting the 
United States citizens by exploiting, manipulating,  pressuring, on coercing United State 
citizens for protected information.  The government has not established a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion by the 
geographic proximity of Taiwan to the PRC.  The geographic closeness might induce 
Taiwan to obtain protected information from United States sources but in obtaining that 
information Taiwan does not use tactics and endeavors that could cause issues with the 
United States as their main protector and supplier of military equipment. 
 
 Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  The Appeal Board consistently 
applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that its underlying premise was that 
an applicant should not be placed in a position where he is forced to make a choice 
between the interest of the family member and the interest of the United States.  (See, 
ISCR Case No. 03-17620, (App. Bd, Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933, (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382, (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); and ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205, (App. Bd. Jan. 21. 2005)).  Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
 In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Taiwan cause security concerns, I 
considered that Taiwan is an ally of the United States, has a defense agreement with 
the United States, and is one of the United States’ substantial trading partners.  I 
considered that Taiwan improved its human rights position and its people enjoy basic 
freedoms.  While the United States has a one-China policy, the United States does 
maintain cultural, commercial, and other ties with Taiwan.  I considered that Taiwan 
does engage in economic and other types of espionage, and there are instances of 
Taiwan officials and companies engaging in such espionage with individuals in the 
United States.  There are no indications in these instances Taiwan was targeting United 
States citizens to provide economic or other sensitive information.  I also considered 
that faced with new and competing national interests, the United States policy toward 
Taiwan could change.  While Taiwan is a country that is friendly to the United Stares, it 
 
10 
 
 
could engage in espionage against United States interests.  Friendly countries may 
have profound disagreements with the United States or have engaged in espionage 
against United States economic, scientific, or technical interest.  A friendly relationship 
is not determinative, but it makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt 
to exploit a United States citizen through relatives or associates in that country.  Taiwan 
is not a hostile country, nor is its interests inimical to the United States.  The United 
States and Taiwan are large democracies, enjoy good relations, and are trading 
partners.  It is reasonable to consider that Taiwan would not take any action to 
jeopardize their friendly position with the United States because of their need for trade 
and defense assistance from the United States.  It would be considered an act 
unfriendly to the interest of the United States to coerce its citizens with relatives in the 
United States to pressure their United States relatives to provide economic or other 
espionage information against the interest of the United States.  Taiwan has cooperated 
with the United States in the investigation of espionage incidents with Taiwan.  While 
none of the considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to be 
considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion from his 
family members in Taiwan. 
 
 Since Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the government produced 
substantial evidence by way of exhibits to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 7(a), 
(b), (d), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15).  An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government (See, ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 Applicant has raised Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) ¶ 8(a) (the 
nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of 
the United States).  Applicant’s mother is 89 year old has retired from the Taiwan 
banking system for over 30 years and draws a pension from them. She draws a pension 
from her husband's service as a Taiwan government employee.  She is dependent on 
the government for her pension and medical support.  Applicant’s siblings and their 
spouses are professionals who worked for private businesses in Taiwan.  They are not 
dependent on the Taiwanese government for their subsistence.  Applicant talks to his 
mother frequently, at least once a week, but less to his siblings, about once a month.  
Applicant made a number of trips to Taiwan for normal visits to his family or on business 
for his employer.  His mother and siblings have come to the United States to visit and 
stay with him or obtain an education at a United States university.  It is clear that they 
have a close family relationship.  His contact with his immediate family is frequent and 
not casual.  Applicant’s information concerning his family members’ living conditions, life 
style, and professions, shows it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position to 
choose between the interests of his family and the interests of the United States.  
Applicant established his family members in Taiwan are ordinary citizens leading normal 
lives, and that they do not present a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
 
11 
 
 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  The positions and activities of his family in Taiwan 
show that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of being coerced or 
pressured to choose between these people and his interests in protecting the national 
security of the United States.  FI MC ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s vulnerability to duress is also important.  Applicant has been in the 
United States for over 33 years, more than half of his life, and a United States citizen for 
over 21 years.  His wife has been a resident of the United States for a similar period and 
a United States citizen for the same amount of time.  He has three children born and 
educated in the United States, who are citizens of the United States.  Applicant has 
contributed to his community by serving on the local school board and running for public 
office.  Applicant has substantial assets in the United States.  Even though he has 
assets in Taiwan, those assets are about ten percent of his total assets and are with a 
brokerage company which has the assets in publicly traded stocks.  He has worked for 
and retired from a prestigious laboratory in the United States.  Applicant established FI 
MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest either because the individual’s sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest), and FI MC AG ¶ 8(f) (the value or routine nature of the foreign business, 
financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual).   
 
 Applicant’s numerous and repeated trips to Taiwan were mostly for business and 
to visit family.  He took a trip to Taiwan in 2004 using a Taiwan passport and voted in a 
Taiwan election.  He was taking advantage of a special airline ticket price requiring him 
to obtain the passport and vote in a Taiwanese election.  He was not applying for a 
security clearance at the time so he did not consider that accepting the favorable terms 
of the arrangement from the Taiwan airline was a security concern.  He immediately 
returned his Taiwan passport to Taiwan after returning from the trip.  In spite of this one 
trip by Applicant, I find that Applicant has demonstrated that he is not unusually 
vulnerable to duress.   
 
 Applicant has a normal sense of loyalty or obligation to his family in Taiwan.  But 
he also has long standing relationship and connections in the United States.  He has 
demonstrated that these relationships will lead him to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States.  FI MC ¶ 8(b) and 8(f) apply. 
 
 Applicant has raised FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation).  Applicant has the burden of presenting information to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns raised by the government.  
Applicant's contact with his mother and siblings and their spouses are not casual and 
infrequent.  His wife's contacts with her brother and his contact with his brother-in-law 
are minimal and infrequent but not casual.  There is little likelihood that the contacts 
 
12 
 
 
could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  Accordingly, FI MC 8(c) applies 
to his wife's brother but not to his mother and siblings in Taiwan.   
 
 In sum, Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his family contacts and 
financial and land holdings in Taiwan do not cause a security concern.  I conclude FI 
MC AGs ¶¶ 8(a), (b), (c), and (f) are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The “whole person” concept 
requires consideration of all available information about Applicant, not a single item in 
isolation, to reach a common sense determination concerning Applicant’s security 
worthiness.  Applicant’s family in Taiwan both individually and collectively are in 
positions and circumstances that make it unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position 
to choose between the interests of his family and the interest of the United States, or 
that he can be exploited, pressured, or coerced because of them.  His contacts with his 
family in Taiwan are strong but they do not create a conflict of interest between the 
family members and his loyalty to the United States.  Applicant has been in the United 
States for over 33 years and a citizen of the United States for over 21 years.  His 
children were born here and are United States citizens.  He has accumulated significant 
assets in the United States, which offset his financial and property interests in Taiwan.  
He has had a successful career working for a prestigious laboratory in the United States 
and contributed to his community in the United States.  His travels to Taiwan were for 
business or pleasure and not connected to the Taiwanese government.  He established 
that his contacts with his family in Taiwan do not indicate a security risk.  
 
Applicant’s life story is an example of the success of many immigrants to the 
United States.  He came to the United States to better himself through education.  He 
remained here, became a United States citizen, established himself in his community, 
and worked to obtain a better life in the United States.  He was very successful in his 
work with a prestigious laboratory.  The family enjoys a typical United States life style 
 
13 
 
 
and he successfully contributed as a member of society and community in the United 
States.  Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
