 Applicant’s spouse, as discussed herein, served as her personal representative and testified as a witness.1
  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as2
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-16551
SSN: ---------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se and with a Personal Representative  1
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a2
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on April 23, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to an
administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in this
case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on unpaid federal and
state tax liens, Guideline J for criminal conduct based on failure to file federal income
tax returns, and Guideline E for personal conduct based on falsification of a security-
clearance application. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided against
Applicant. 
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:3
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 Exhibits 2 and 6 were not admitted into evidence; therefore, those documents were not considered in making4
findings of fact or for any other aspect of the case. 
2
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision3
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on June 2, 2008, and
she requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2008. The hearing
took place as scheduled on August 14, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on
August 25, 2008.
The record was left open until August 28, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity
to submit documentary information related to the IRS and federal income tax practice
and procedure. Applicant made a timely submission, and those matters were forwarded
by department counsel who raised no objections. Collectively, the post-hearing matters
are admitted as Exhibit E.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied all the SOR allegations. Based on the record evidence as a
whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.4
Applicant is a 62-year-old truck driver. She and her spouse operate a trucking
company, and they each hold a commercial driver’s license. They operate as
independent contractors for a transit company that contracts with the federal
government. She is seeking an industrial security clearance for the first time. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that are related to state and federal
income taxes as follows:
• She is indebted to the IRS for approximately $7,013 for tax year 2001 (Exhibits 4,
8, and D). The IRS filed on a federal tax lien against Applicant for that amount in
April 2006.
• She is indebted to a state tax authority for approximately $4,636 (Exhibits 5, 7,
and 8). The state filed three liens against Applicant for different amounts in 2003
and 2004.
 Schiff has been described as “a well-known recidivist tax protestor.” United States v. Schiff, 510 F.3d 1114,5
1116 (9  Cir. 2007). Schiff was convicted of conspiracy to defraud the government and multiple tax-relatedth
offenses, and the Ninth Circuit recently affirmed his convictions and his resulting 151-month sentence. Id. at
1117, footnote 2. 
 In 2004, the Ninth Circuit upheld a preliminary injunction on the sale of a book by Schiff, The Federal Mafia:6
How the Government Illegally Imposes and Unlawfully Collects Income Taxes, finding it constituted fraudulent
commercial speech. United States v. Schiff, 379 F.3d 621, 630 (9  Cir. 2004).th
3
Beginning in about tax year 2002, Applicant, along with her spouse, stopped filing
federal income tax returns. She did so because she was persuaded or convinced by her
spouse that no law requires a person to file income tax returns and no law requires a
person to pay income taxes. As a result, neither she nor her spouse has filed federal
income tax returns since tax year 2002. Applicant’s spouse reached these conclusions
after studying materials produced by Irwin Schiff,  including his book The Federal Mafia5 6
(Tr. 71). 
Applicant and her spouse say they have submitted various material to the IRS,
but they have yet to receive a response other than an acknowledgment (Exhibit A). One
of the items they submitted to the IRS is a multiple-page document styled “Affidavit of
Revocation and Rescission” (Exhibit C). The affidavit contains 25 paragraphs, but in
essence they claim that the federal government (Congress and the IRS) committed
constructive fraud by misleading and deceiving them and the general public into
believing that they were required to file income tax returns and pay income taxes; as a
result, they revoked, rescinded, and cancelled all tax documents signed and/or
submitted by them; and they declared that they are not and never were taxpayers and
are not subject to the federal income tax laws. 
Applicant has not paid, settled, or resolved the tax liens alleged in the SOR (Tr.
58). Based on the affidavit submitted to the IRS, Applicant has no intention of filing a
federal income tax return and she has no intention of paying federal income taxes (Tr.
62–63). And based on income Applicant reported in a personal financial statement, it
appears Applicant and her spouse have sufficient income ($6,000 monthly) to establish
a tax liability and an obligation to file a return (Exhibit 3).  
Applicant completed a security-clearance application in June 2005 (Exhibit 1). In
doing so, she was required to answer several questions about her financial record.
Question 27c inquired about tax liens, and Applicant answered “no,” thereby indicating
that she had not had a tax lien placed against her for failing to pay taxes or other debts
in the last seven years. She did not disclose the three state tax liens filed in 2003 and
2004 because she was unaware of those liens when she completed the application (Tr.
59). She first became aware of the state tax liens during the background investigation
(Tr. 65–66). 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.7
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an8
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any9
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order10
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating18
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 19
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 20
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 21
 DC 7 is “failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing22
of the same.”
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination17
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically18
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be19
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
unresolved financial problems. Both the IRS and a state tax authority have filed tax liens
against Applicant for a total of more than $11,000, and she has no current plan to
address these debts. These circumstances raise a security concern because they
indicate unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial20
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. In addition, the failure to file federal21
income tax returns raises a security concern as well.  The record evidence is more22
than sufficient to establish these three disqualifying conditions.  
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating23
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 24
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”25
6
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. In contrary, her indebtedness was due to circumstances within her
control and resulted from her criminal conduct, which is discussed below. Applicant
does not have a reasonable basis to dispute the debts, and she has not made a good-
faith effort to resolve the indebtedness. Accordingly, Guideline F is decided against
Applicant.   
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity23
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.”  24
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has engaged in a
pattern of criminal conduct by her deliberate and willful failure to file federal income tax
returns since tax year 2002. These circumstances raise a security concern under DC 125
 DC 3 is the “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally26
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
 W ithout objections, administrative or official notice was taken of 26 U.S.C. § 7203 as set forth in Appellate27
Exhibit I (Tr. 34–37). Section 7203 is a penalty provision that does not establish a duty to file federal income
tax returns or to pay federal income taxes.  
 ISCR Case No. 94-1153 (App. Bd. Mar. 26, 1997) (also, the Board notes and summarizes numerous federal28
court decisions that have rejected challenges to the federal tax laws and IRS regulations and practices).
Likewise, see ISCR Case 98-0810 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2000) (the Board notes and summarizes numerous
federal court decisions that have rejected challenges to the federal tax laws and IRS regulations and
practices). 
7
and DC 3  because her conduct falls within 26 U.S.C. § 7203, which makes the willful26
failure to file a federal income tax return a misdemeanor offense.  Although she has not27
been charged in federal court, Applicant’s multiple violations of her obligation to file a
federal income tax return cast significant doubt on her fitness for a security clearance.  
Applicant, along with her spouse, assert that no law requires her to file a federal
income tax return and that no law requires her to pay federal income taxes. The DOHA
Appeal Board has made it clear, however, that a security clearance case is not an
appropriate forum for contesting the legality of federal income tax laws:
If Applicant wishes to challenge the constitutionality and legality of federal
tax laws (and IRS regulations and practices), then he must seek redress
elsewhere. Under the Directive, DOHA Administrative Judges and the
Board are authorized to adjudicate industrial security clearance cases, not
the constitutionality and legality of federal tax laws and IRS regulations
and practices. In recognition of the limits of the jurisdiction of DOHA
Administrative Judges and this Board under the Directive, the rulings of
federal courts on the legality and constitutionality of the federal tax laws
and IRS practices and procedures must be accepted and applied in DOHA
proceedings.28
I am aware of no decision from a federal court that supports Applicant’s position that
she is not required to file a federal income tax return and that she is not required to pay
federal income taxes. Applicant’s Exhibit B, which purports to be a copy of several
pages of transcript from a federal court case, does not constitute binding legal
precedent and I have given it no weight. Likewise, none of Applicant’s other
documentary exhibits support her position. Accordingly, the record evidence is sufficient
to show that Applicant’s failure to file federal income tax returns since tax year 2002
was in violation of 26 U.S.C. § 7203.  
The guideline also contains several conditions that could mitigate security
concerns, but none apply in Applicant’s favor. Her conduct, and that of her spouse,
suggests tax evasion. Her criminal conduct was recent and not isolated. Although she
was persuaded or convinced to follow her spouse on this journey, there is no evidence
showing she was pressured or coerced into doing so. Further, her criminal conduct is
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating29
conditions).  
 Revised Guidelines at 10.30
 The government did not produce evidence that Applicant completed a security-clearance application in31
March 2006. On this basis, the falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 3.b is decided for Applicant. Likewise, the
allegation in SOR ¶ 3.c is adequately covered in SOR ¶ 2.a. On this basis, the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.c is
decided for Applicant.  
8
ongoing and likely to continue. These circumstances militate against a successful case
in reform and rehabilitation. Overall, Applicant’s conduct—as well as the dubious and
specious legal arguments in her defense—demonstrates poor judgment. Also, it shows
Applicant lacks the trustworthiness and reliability required of those entrusted with the
privilege of a security clearance. Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against Applicant. 
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and29
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  30
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s answer to Questions 27c of  her
June 2005 security-clearance application, as she did not report the three state tax liens
called for by the question. She denies that her answer was intentionally false and
contends she was unaware of the liens when she completed the application. Having had
the opportunity to listen to her testimony and observe her demeanor, her explanation is
accepted as credible. The evidence is not sufficient to show that she made a
deliberately false statement when she answered Question 27c. On this basis, Guideline
E is decided for Applicant.  31
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns raises under Guidelines F and J. Applicant
did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and
that analysis does not support a favorable decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 3.a–3.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest  to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
