                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15425 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on December 22, 2006.  On May 1, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
Applicant under Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 8, 2008.  He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 19, 2008, admitting all of the factual allegations in the SOR with 
explanation.  He requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department 
counsel was prepared to proceed on June 16, 2008, and the case was assigned to 
another administrative judge on June 19, 2008.  The case was reassigned to me on July 
18, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 28, 2008, and I convened the 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
hearing as scheduled on August 28, 2008.  The government offered two exhibits, 
marked Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
submitted seven exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits A through G, which were received 
without objection.  Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf.  DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September, 8, 2008.  Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request for administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Nigeria. (Tr. 15-16)  The request and the supporting documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I.  
Applicant had no objection to the request for administrative notice and the attached 
documents.  The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanation.   
 
Applicant is 48 years old and has been employed as a test and commissioning 
engineer for a defense contractor since 2000.  Applicant was born and raised in Nigeria.  
He attended the equivalent of high school and two years of advanced schooling in 
Nigeria.  He came to the United States in 1985 to further his studies.  He received an 
associate degree in physics from a United States university but was required to drop out 
of school in 1987 when his father in Nigeria passed away and he did not have the 
financial resources to continue.  He worked for a number of years and then enrolled in 
another United States college in 1997, and received a Masters of Electrical Engineering 
degree in 1999. (Tr. 32-34)   
 
Applicant arrived in the United States on a student visa.  His visa was changed to 
a temporary visa when he had to leave school in 1987.  He became a permanent 
resident in 1994 and received his United States citizenship in 1999.  Shortly thereafter, 
he started working for the defense contractor.  Since his arrival in the United States, 
Applicant has returned to Nigeria once in 1998 to visit his family and father's grave.  He 
did not return to Nigeria when his father passed away in 1987.  (Tr. 34-37; Government 
Exhibit 1, Security Clearance Application, E-QIP, dated February 14, 2007)   
 
Applicant’s wife was also born in Nigeria and came to the United States in 1994.  
They met in the United States and married in 2003.  She is a permanent resident and 
plans to apply for United States citizenship as soon as she is eligible.  They have one 
daughter, born in 2004, who is a United States citizen living in the United States.  His 
 
3 
 
 
wife has three siblings who are citizens and residents of the United States.  Her parents 
are citizens and residents of Nigeria. (Tr. 36-39)  His wife has never returned to Nigeria 
to visit her parents.  He does not believe his wife has sent money to her parents for their 
support.  She does occasionally talk to them by telephone. (Tr. 57-58) 
 
Applicant’s father died in 1987.  Applicant's mother was born in Nigeria and is a 
Nigerian citizen.  She lived with Applicant and his wife in the United States from July 
2004 until April 2007 when she returned to Nigeria to visit her children.  She returned to 
the United States in January 2008 and now resides with one of her daughters, 
Applicant's sister, in the United States.  She has a permanent resident card from the 
United States and intends to apply for United States citizenship when she is eligible. (Tr. 
39-43; Applicant Exhibit A, Permanent Resident Card, dated April 8, 2007; Applicant 
Exhibit E, Security Clearance Application, dated December 22, 2006, at 19-25) 
 
Applicant is the oldest of 12 children.  He has two sisters who reside in the 
United States.  One is a United State citizen and the other came to the United States on 
a lottery visa and is now a United States permanent resident.  His other nine siblings 
reside in Nigeria and are Nigerian citizens.  Applicant has little contact with his siblings 
in Nigeria.  He does not know the employer or status of employment of his siblings. He 
believes they work for banks in Nigeria.  One of his sisters may work for the Federal 
Reserve Bank in Nigeria.  
 
Applicant does not consider his relationship with his siblings in Nigeria as close.  
Since the family lives in a village and communications are poor, they do not talk often. 
He does not have frequent contact with them and some he has not talked to in years.  
He may have contact with one of the siblings once a year and does ask about the other 
siblings.  He does have an elderly aunt who he talks to more frequently and does ask 
about his siblings. (Tr. 43-44, 58-61; Government Exhibit 2, Answer to Interrogatories, 
dated December 3, 2007)   
 
After their father died, the siblings considered what they should do for their 
mother.  The house that their parents lived in was run down and the siblings decided to 
repair it.  Applicant assisted this effort by providing funds to his siblings in Nigeria to 
assist in rebuilding and renovating the house.  He does not have a property interest in 
the house.  He does not own any other property or have any assets in Nigeria. (Tr. 29-
31; Government Exhibit 2, Answers to Interrogatories, dated December 3, 2007, at 4) 
 
Applicant has significant assets in the United States.  He owns his own home.  
(Applicant Exhibit B, Mortgage payments, dated July 15, 2008).  He has almost 
$100,000 in assets in his employer's 401K savings plan. (Applicant Exhibit C, 
Statement, dated June 30, 2008).   
 
Applicant is a valued employee of the defense contractor.  His direct supervisor 
testified that he has known Applicant since he was hired in 2000.  They were originally 
peers.  In 2007, the witness was selected to head a project for the employer and he 
requested Applicant to be on his team.  He is now Applicant's direct supervisor and 
 
4 
 
 
interacts with Applicant on a daily basis.  Applicant is technically competent with a 
positive attitude and good moral character.  Applicant has integrity and is trustworthy, 
and has protected sensitive client information.  (Tr. 16-24; Applicant Exhibit D, Letter, 
dated, August 8, 2008)   
 
The director of field services for Applicant's employer noted he has known 
Applicant for over eight years and has been both his colleague and supervisor.  
Applicant constantly demonstrated a high level of maturity, discretion, and exemplary 
performance of all of his duties.  He receives high praise from both his colleagues and 
customers for his work ethic and moral standing.  He has complete trust in Applicant's 
judgment and he is convinced Applicant will act in the best interest of the United States. 
(Applicant Exhibit D, Letter, dated August 5, 2008) 
 
A senior engineer for Applicant's employer noted that he interviewed and hired 
Applicant for the employer.  He has worked with Applicant since that time as both a co-
worker and supervisor.  Applicant has been a diligent, capable, and respected member 
of the company.  He is mature and reliable and in his daily behavior shows loyalty to the 
United States.  His activities with colleagues and clients have always been professional.  
(Applicant Exhibit D, Letter, dated August 8, 2008) 
 
 Nigeria is Africa’s most populated country, with over a half of the population of all 
of Africa.  Nigeria became independent from Great Britain in 1960, and has a 
constitutional parliamentary government.  The country was ruled by the military until 
1999 when there was a democratic election bringing back civilian rule. (Hearing Exhibit 
1, Background Note: Nigeria, United Stated Department of State, dated April 2008)  The 
Department of State continuously issues travel warnings because of chaos and 
lawlessness in Nigeria.  Lawlessness in Nigeria leads to car bombings, kidnapping of 
foreigners, and violent crimes.  Violence is particularly acute in the Niger Delta region.  
Religious tension between Muslims and Christians results in occasional acts of 
communal violence.  Al-Qaida leadership has expressed interest in overthrowing the 
government.  Road and air travel are dangerous. (Hearing Exhibit 1, Travel Warning 
Nigeria, dated October 30, 2007)  The government’s human rights record is poor and 
government officials commit serious human rights abuses.  These include the 
abridgment of rights to change government, politically motivated killings by security 
forces, use of excessive force and torture, restriction on free speech and press, and 
other physical human rights abuses. (Hearing Exhibit 1, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices-2007, Nigeria, dated March 11, 2008)  Nigeria has made progress in a 
fragile democracy.  Nigeria is one of the United States’ key strategic partners in Africa.  
It became a major player in Africa helping to negotiate settlements with other countries 
and plays a vital role in peacekeeping operations.  Nigeria remains relatively stable 
although ethnic and religious clashes in part of the country are common. (Hearing 
Exhibit 1, CRS Report to Congress, Nigeria: Current Issues, January 30, 2008) 
 
 There have been improved and strong ties between Nigeria and the United State 
since June 1998.  Bilateral relationships have continued to improve and there is good 
cooperation on many important foreign policy goals.  The Nigerian government has lent 
 
5 
 
 
strong support to the United States government’s counter-terrorism efforts since 
September 11, 2001.  Nigeria has played a leading role in forging an anti-terrorism 
consensus among states in Sub-Saharan Africa. (Hearing Exhibit 1, Background Notes 
on Nigeria, dated April 2008, at 11-12)  There is no evidence Nigeria has exploited its 
citizens to obtain classified information from United States citizens. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 There is a security concern because foreign contacts and interests may indicate 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests.  
Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not 
limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. (AG ¶ 6) 
 
 Applicant has nine siblings who are citizens and residents of Nigeria and he has 
contact with them through telephone calls.  While he does not call any of his siblings 
exclusively, he does have contact with them as a group.  The government has 
established that there is a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion in Nigeria because Nigeria is a country with a poor 
human rights record and much lawlessness in the country necessitating a continuous 
travel warning issued by the United States Government.  There have been kidnappings 
and killings of foreigners in Nigeria, particularly oil industry workers.  Applicant's siblings 
in Nigeria raise security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI 
DC) AG ¶ 79(a) (Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion); and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) (Connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information).  Each 
individual contact with his siblings by itself may not create a heightened risk of foreign 
influence, but the totality of the contacts may indicate a heightened risk of foreign 
influence.  There is no security concern for his mother and sister who are citizens of 
Nigeria but live in the United States.  There is no heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion since they live in the United States and 
are not located in Nigeria. 
 
 While not listed as a security concern in the SOR, I have considered that 
Applicant's father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of Nigeria.  
Applicant lives with his wife in the United States.  These factors raise FI DC AG ¶ 7(d) 
(sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that 
 
7 
 
 
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.)  
 
 I have considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature 
of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of 
the U.S.); AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest; and AG ¶ 8(c) (Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so 
casual or infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation) and determine all apply to Applicant’s circumstances. 
 
 Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  The Appeal Board consistently 
applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that its underlying premise was that 
an applicant should not be placed in a position where he is forced to make a choice 
between the interest of the family member and the interest of the United States.  (See, 
ISCR Case No. 03-17620, App. Bd, Apr. 17, 2006; ISCR Case No. 03-24933, App. Bd. 
Jul. 28, 2005; ISCR Case No. 03-02382, App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005; and ISCR Case No. 
03-15205, App. Bd. Jan. 21. 2005).  Thus, an administrative judge was not permitted to 
apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the new 
guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if 
an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 In determining if Applicant’s family in Nigeria causes security concerns, I 
considered that Nigeria is an ally of the United States, has a defense agreement with 
the United States, and is one of the United States’ substantial trading partners.  While 
Nigeria has had a poor human rights record, I considered that Nigeria is improving its 
human rights position and its people enjoy basic freedoms.  There are no indications the 
government of Nigeria or any group of terrorists or lawless entities in Nigeria have 
targeted United States citizens or relatives of United States citizens to provide economic 
or other sensitive information.  While Nigeria is a country friendly to the United Stares, it 
could engage in espionage against United States interests.  Friendly countries may 
have profound disagreements with the United States or have engaged in espionage 
against United States economic, scientific, or technical interest.  A friendly relationship 
is not determinative, but it makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt 
to exploit a United States citizen through relatives or associates in that country.  Nigeria 
is not a hostile country, nor is its interests inimical to the United States.  The United 
States and Nigeria are large democracies, enjoy good relations, and are trading 
partners.  It is reasonable to consider that Nigeria would not take any action to 
jeopardize their friendly position with the United States because of their need for trade 
 
8 
 
 
and defense assistance from the United States.  It would be considered an act 
unfriendly to the Nigerian interest with the United States to coerce its citizens with 
relatives in the United States to pressure their United States relatives to provide 
economic or other espionage information against the interest of the United States.  
While none of the considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all 
factors to be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion 
from his family members in Nigeria. 
 
 Applicant has raised Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) ¶ 8(a).  
Applicant's contacts with his family members in Nigeria are minimal even though they 
are siblings.  He established that his family members’ living conditions, life style, and 
professions, show that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position to choose 
between the interests of his family and the interests of the United States.  Applicant 
established his family members in Nigeria are ordinary citizens leading normal lives.  He 
has established that because of the positions and activities of his family in Nigeria and 
the minimal contact he has with them that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of being coerced or pressured to choose between these people and his 
interests in protecting the national security of the United States.  I have considered this 
mitigating condition in conjunction with Applicant's in-laws in Nigeria.  Applicant has 
established this mitigating condition concerning his in-laws for the same reasons as 
established concerning his siblings.  FI MC ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant has raised FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest either because 
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, 
or country is minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest).  Applicant’s vulnerability to duress is also 
important.  Applicant has been in the United States for over 23 years and a United 
States citizen for almost 10 years.  He has a child born in the United States, who is a 
citizen of the United States.  Applicant’s assets are in the United States, and he has no 
financial interest in Nigeria.  Applicant’s one return trip to Nigeria in the 23 years since 
he has left that country was solely for the purpose of visiting family.  He has significant 
assets in the United States to include his home and a retirement account.  Applicant has 
demonstrated that he is not unusually vulnerable to duress.  Applicant has a limited 
sense of loyalty or obligation to his family in Nigeria, but has long standing relationship 
and connections in the United States.  In addition to his own family, his mother and two 
sisters are in the United States.  He has demonstrated that the lack of relationships with 
his siblings in Nigeria and the relationship with his family members in the United Sates 
will lead him to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  This also 
pertains to his in-laws in Nigeria.  FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant has raised FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation).  At best, Applicant's contacts with his siblings and in-
laws in Nigeria are minimal and he hardly knows them.  He is unsure of their 
employment or their living conditions.  He does not communicate with his in-laws and 
 
9 
 
 
his wife communicates with her parents only sporadically.  He does not send his siblings 
or in-laws funds, or presents, and does not visit them.  In fact, he encourages his 
siblings to come to the United Stares for a better life style. 
 
 Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his family members in Nigeria 
do not cause a security concern.  I conclude FI MC AGs ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The “whole person” concept 
requires consideration of all available information about Applicant, not a single item in 
isolation, to reach a common sense determination concerning Applicant’s security 
worthiness.  Applicant has family members in Nigeria, a country with a poor human 
rights record and lawlessness and terrorism.  He also has strong ties to the United 
States.  He has been in the United States for over 23 years and a citizen for almost ten 
years.  He came to the United States to get a better education and has continued to 
strive to improve his status in the United States.  His mother and two sisters live in the 
United States.  He has a child who is a United States citizen and his wife is a permanent 
resident intending to become a United States citizen when she is eligible.  His financial 
assets are in the United States and not in Nigeria.  The family enjoys a typical United 
States life style.  He is a valued and trusted employee, and his supervisors and co-
workers attest to his loyalty, honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness.  Overall, on balance 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
