                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15527
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On April 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 23, 2008 and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 4, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on July 15,
2008.  A hearing was held on July 15, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether it
would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or deny,
Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case
consisted of four exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and
three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on July 23, 2008.  Based upon a
2
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of his payments to creditors 1.,e, 1.f and 1.g, an entered
judgment by the same creditor identified in sub-paragraphs 1.b and 1.c., a written
budget, and medical payments.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven
days, to July 22, 2008 to supplement the record. The Government was afforded two
days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
documented copies of payments to creditor 1.d and 1.f, a legal services agreement for
filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, court records involving creditor 1.c, a statement
concerning his recent purchase of a 2008 Ford pick-up truck, and a prepared written
budget.  Department counsel did not object to these post-hearing submissions.
Applicant’s  post-hearing exhibits were admitted and considered.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated seven debts
exceeding $101,000.00.  Under Guideline E, he is alleged to have omitted delinquent
debts over 180 and 90 days delinquent, respectively, when completing his January
2007 electronic questionnaire for investigation processing (e-QIP).
 For her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the allegations.  He
denied the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.b and 1.c, claiming these entries
are duplicates of a debt covered by an entered default judgment, which he continues to
oppose.  Applicant claimed, too, that the creditor 1.e debt is a duplicate of the admitted
debt covered by creditor 1.g.  Applicant attributed his delinquent debt problems to his
acquiescing in his wife handling the bills, and her back injuries in 2002 that left her
unemployable and unable to assist in paying their bills.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old-computer integration specialist for a defense contractor
who seeks to retain his security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant is married (for 32 years) and has one grown daughter.  He has held a
security while in the Air force and Air National Guard, and has held a clearance for most
of his tenure with his current defense contractor, which commenced in 1978 (R.T., at
83-84, 89-90).  
Beginning in the early 1990s, Applicant began passing the responsibility for
handling family finances to his wife (W).  Tired of the discord that accompanied finance
3
disputes between himself and W, he transferred full bill paying responsibility to W in
1997.  The arrangement worked satisfactorily for a number of years. 
Applicant’s arrangement with W to handle all of the family’ finances unraveled
following W’s accident in 2002 and resulting back injury.   Because of her injury, she
was forced to take disability and cease working (R.T., at 52-54).  When she could no
longer contribute to the family’s financial obligations, she stopped making payments on
many of their joint credit card accounts (R.T., at 30).  When ever Applicant would ask
about the status of their accounts, W would always assure him that she was taking care
of them.  W claims she was concerned about Applicant’s health and did not want to
worry him with their debt delinquencies.  Like W, Applicant has been in poor health for a
number of years.  Both W and Applicant suffer from diabetes and back problems (R.T.,
at 32-33, 51-54, 68).  Each  underwent bypass surgery (R.T., at 29-30, 51-55).  Their
co-pays for their medications exceed $1,000.00 a month according to W (R.T., at 35,
56-57).  While this does seem high, it is not challenged and is accepted.
Between 2002 and 2007, Applicant accumulated considerable debt, much of it
consumer-related.  Altogether, Applicant and W accrued seven delinquent debts
exceeding $101,000.00 with accumulated interest and fees.  Applicant claims two of
these listed creditors represent duplicate debts.  Whether they are or not cannot be
determined without more documentation.  Applicant provides no evidence of mounted
disputes with the credit reporting agencies over the debts he claims are duplicates and
no correspondence exchanges with the creditors themselves.  While they may be
duplicates, the duplications cannot be determined from the credit reports.  Without any
documented disputes of these listed debts, too many doubts remain to draw any
favorable inferences about their duplicate status.
One of the listed accounts (creditor 1.c) is a collection debt that lists an amount
owed of $33,369.00.  Court records report that this creditor purchased the debt from
Applicant’s credit card obligee and petitioned the court for recovery of $14,118.02, along
with pre-judgment and post-judgment interest, attorneys fees and costs (see ex. G).
Both W and records confirm that Applicant and W were served with a summons
associated with the petition in May 2006 (compare ex. G with R.T., at 122-28).  Court
documents report that Applicant and W were also mailed a copy of the default judgment
entered in August 2006 (see ex. G).  Applicant and W do not challenge receipt of the
documents, and made no appearances in the matter (see ex. G; R.T., at 79,124).
Neither Applicant nor W ever initiated any appeal of the default judgment, and never
sought to have the judgment vacated for cause.  The judgment itself awards relief to
creditor 1.c as follows: $14,118.02 in principal, $14,415.61 in accrued pre-judgment
interest, $2,117.70 in attorneys fees, plus costs.  Post-judgment interest by law accrues
on the total balance awarded according to the legal rate of interest.  Without any
payments towards satisfaction of this judgment, the total judgment balance must
currently exceed $35,000.00.  With post-judgment interest continuing to accrue at the
legal rate, this judgment debt can be expected to add significant annual increases to the
outstanding judgment balance. 
4
While Applicant admits to his creditor 1.a debt, he never used the card himself
and does not know when the account was last addressed.  The creditor 1.a account
reports an outstanding balance of $12,196.00 on his credit report.  After reviewing his
credit report, Applicant asked W to look into it (R.T., at 92).  To date, neither he nor W
have received any information from the creditor about the listed debt.  Applicant is
looking to his bankruptcy lawyer at this time to help him figure out this debt, and devise
a plan for resolving this debt and others he has no been able to address (R.T., at 92-
93).  Currently, Applicant’s creditor 1.a debt remains unsatisfied as alleged in the SOR.  
Addressing his creditor 1.d debt, Applicant assures he has paid this debt down
considerably (to just over $12,000.00) from the amount listed in the SOR ($16,707.00).
His written and oral proofs corroborate his claims and are accepted (see ex. B; R.T., at
48-49, 59-60). While W’s documented payments on this account collectively reflect
modest payments, they appear to represent part of an ongoing debt reduction effort
(compare exs. B and E).  Applicant documents a similar repayment arrangement with
creditor 1.f, which is similar enough to the debt covered by her repayment arrangement
to warrant inferences it is the same identified creditor 1.f debt  (see exs. 3, 4, and D;
R.T., at 48, 59, 99-100).  
Applicant assures he had little knowledge of the extent of his debt delinquencies
before his receipt of the SOR.  He acknowledges creditor 1.c’s initiating a debt petition
against him in April 2006, but nothing more about his other delinquent accounts.  In July
2008 (following the hearing in this case), he and W entered into a legal services
agreement for the expressed purpose of filing a petition for Chapter 13 relief (see exs C
and F).  The agreement itself recites schedules and notices to creditors and suggests
some knowledge of outstanding debts by both Applicant and W.  The agreement itself
recites professional consideration of $3,274.00, which breaks down to a down payment
of $1,700.00 and monthly payments of $374.00 a month through the plan (see ex. F).  It
is not clear from their furnished documentation whether or not they have tendered the
agreed fees and proceeded with the filing of a Chapter 13 petition. 
Applicant and W claim no financial counseling before the hearing and provide no
evidence of any counseling associated with their Chapter 13 legal agreement (see exs.
C and F).  Based on the letter they received from their bankruptcy counsel (ex. C),
Applicant and W are in the process of compiling information necessary for counsel to
prepare the necessary schedules, and are in the process of preparing to attend a
required counseling session (see ex. C; R.T., at 77-78).  It remains unclear, though,
when Applicant and W will be petitioning for Chapter 13 relief and whether they will be
able to meet the payment requirements of any approved plan.  Applicant and W provide
no additional documentation of their Chapter 13 progress, or if and how they are
addressing their remaining outstanding debts listed in the SOR.  At this time, they
provide no documentation of any dispute or repayment efforts relating to creditors 1.b,
1.e and 1.g, and no favorable inferences can be drawn at this time regarding any of
these creditors (R.T., at 47-48, 93-98).
5
With their available income, Applicant and W are currently purchasing their
home.  Their furnished budget reflects monthly income of around $4,000.00 a month on
average for the calendar year of 2008 and estimated payments on current expenses of
around $4,000.00 a month (see ex. I).  Their budget allocates monthly payments for
their 1.d and 1.f creditors, but nothing more for any of the remaining listed creditors (see
ex. I).  
Applicant and W value their home at $40,000.00 and owe approximately
$15,000.00 on the mortgage securing their home loan (R.T., at 107). Applicant
estimates his mortgage payments are about $630.00 a month.  He has a stock savings
plan that he contributes to (R.T., at 108).  He also owns a pick-up truck that he
purchased in March 2008 in exchange for his 2003 trade-in Explorer that he had
recently totaled out, and monthly payments of $445.98 (an increase of $11.38 a month
over the payments he was making on the Explorer) on a $21,729.00 payoff for the new
2008 vehicle (compare ex. H with R.T., at 110-17).
Asked to complete a security clearance application (e-QIP) in January 2007,
Applicant omitted his debts over 180 and 90 days delinquent, respectively, when
responding to questions 28a and 28b.  He attributed his omissions to his lack of
knowledge of any delinquent debts besides the judgment debt which he listed (see ex. 1;
R.T., at 104).   He assures he did not purposely omit his delinquent debts.
To be sure, most of Applicant’s omitted debts date to 2002 and (according to W)
were admittedly delinquent for long periods of time.  Without a credit report or spouse to
keep him abreast of his debts, it is conceivable that he might not have known he had
debts at the time that had been or were 180 days delinquent, or were then over 90 days
delinquent.  His detailing of the 2002 adverse judgment taken against him by creditor 1.c
is provides plausible proof of his good-faith intentions about being up-front with his
known delinquent debts.  Considering all of the circumstances of Applicant’s omissions,
his claims of inadvertent omission are accepted as both plausible and credible.
Inferences warrant that Applicant’s omissions were not deliberate, and not made with
any intent to intentionally mislead the Government.  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
6
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
7
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Following his wife’s accident and ensuing disability in 2002, Applicant and his wife
fell behind with their debts.  Out of concern of worrying Applicant, W did not share
information with Applicant for many years regarding the delinquent status of their
accounts.  Only the petition for relief filed by creditor 1.c in May 2006 was made known
to Applicant, and only because he was personally served with the petition, and later
notified of the default judgment.  Applicant’s listed debts either remain unresolved or
have only recently been addressed with modest repayment arrangements.  Absent
documented discharge or payment initiatives with her remaining listed creditors,  these
debts raise security significant concerns.  Of initial security concern, too, are Applicant’s
omissions of his delinquent debts in his completed e-QIP.
Applicant’s finances
In Applicant’s case, his still outstanding delinquent debts warrant the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for financial considerations:
DC ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.” These disqualifying conditions cover the core concern of
AG ¶ 18: poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, which, both individually and collectively, can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to safely occupy a position of trust.  
Applicant’s accumulated debts are attributable in part to his wife’s 2002 accident
and ensuing disability, and her failure to keep him apprised of the status of his debts.
Together, his described difficulties in knowing and apprehending the status of his
accounts, through no obvious fault of his own provide enough extenuating circumstances
to warrant some application of mitigating conditions covered by AG ¶ 18.  MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances,” has some application.
At this time, none of Applicant’s covered debts are documented to have been
paid, disputed, or settled.  They exceed $101,000.00 in the aggregate and represent a
considerable debt load on his current income sources.  His documented payment
arrangements with creditors 1.d and 1.f represent some progress in addressing these
particular debts, but not enough to manifest any established plan for addressing his other
listed debts.  While somewhat encouraging, these two payment arrangements are still
very recent and modest and reflect too little seasoning to warrant any significant overall
mitigation weight. 
8
Without more documented information to demonstrate Applicant is addressing the
bulk of his listed debts and making use of financial counseling, he cannot safely mitigate
all of the Government’s financial concerns.  Holding a security clearance involves the
exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, which include the expectancy of consistent
trust and candor.  Financial stability in a person cleared for access to classified
information is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the
clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial
difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are
implicit in financial cases.
Use of a whole person assessment that takes into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt repayment efforts, while encouraging, are
still insufficient to enable him to surmount security concerns independent of the express
disqualifying conditions covered by AG ¶ 18.  Without more exhibited payment seasoning
and work-out efforts to demonstrate progress in resolving his remaining debts, it is
difficult to draw convincing conclusions about his overall trustworthiness based on
factors not covered in the mitigation conditions of the guideline for financial
considerations.  Based on their  current reported income, it does not appear likely that
Applicant and W will be in a position to make any material reductions in his remaining
debts in the foreseeable future.  While his proposed Chapter 13 petition holds some
promise, its preparation and filing are still too uncertain to facilitate any firm predictions
about the likelihood of the petition’s success.   
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance of
a “meaningful track record” in the management of an applicant’s finances, which
certainly includes evidence of actual debt reduction through repayments.  See ISCR
Case No. 05-01920, at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007).  True, an applicant’s good-faith debt
repayment does not require that he demonstrate repayment of each and every listed
debt.  All that is required is that the applicant demonstrate that he developed a plan to
resolve his debts and taken significant actions to implement the plan.  See ISCR Case
No. 07-16013, at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-09684, at 2 (App. Bd.
July 6, 2006). 
Applicant fails to meet  Appeal Board requirements for repayment progress with
his modest repayments to a couple of his listed creditors.  Most of Applicant‘s listed
debts lack any kind of dispute or repayment documentation.  Particularly troublesome is
the outstanding judgment taken against him in August 2006.  With accruing post-
judgment interest continuing to accrue, the judgment is likely approaching $40,000.00 in
aggregate debt and places Applicant in serious risk of a levy on his personal and real
property interests. Absent some tangible form of repayment plan on this debt and his
other covered debts, safe predictive judgments about his finances cannot be made at
this time.
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
unsatisfied debts and overall presentation of payment histories, Applicant does not
mitigate security concerns related to her still outstanding debts.  Unfavorable conclusions
9
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a through1.c, 1.e
and 1.g.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to sub-paragraphs 1.d, and 1.f.
Applicant’s debt omissions
Posing potential security concerns, too, are Applicant’s omitted delinquent debts
in the e-QIP he completed in January 2007.  He attributed his omissions to his lack of
any knowledge of debts over 180 and 90 days delinquent. He cites the adverse judgment
covering creditor 1.c that he did list as proof of his good-faith intentions to disclose
known creditors.   His claims have merit. 
From a whole person perspective, Applicant presents as an essentially honest
and hardworking applicant who deferred to his wife to manage their finances and pay the
bills.  By W’s credible accounts, she deliberately withheld the status of his debt
delinquencies out of concern for his health.  Applicant’s e-QIP omissions were not
motivated by any deliberate intent to mislead the Government, and his omissions are not
indicative of any overall trust problem. 
Based on Applicant’s accepted explanations, he may take full advantage of: MC
17(f), “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.”
Overall, Applicant is credited with his successful refutation of the allegations of
falsification in sub-paragraphs 2.a and 2.b of  the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT    
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.a:: FOR APPLICANT
10
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
