                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-17961
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein , Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 17, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
Lokey-Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on April 2, 2007. On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on April 8, 2008, and requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to another
Administrative Judge on May 2, 2008.  It was transferred to the undersigned on May 5,
2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on May 13, 2008, scheduling the hearing for June
17, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented five exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 5.  The Applicant presented eleven exhibits, referred to
as Applicant’s Exhibits A through K.  The Applicant called two witnesses and testified on
his own behalf.  The record remained open until July 21, 2008, to allow the Applicant to
submit additional supporting documentation.  The Applicant submitted nine Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 9.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 27, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case
2
fille, pleadings, exhibits and testimony eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 42 years old and divorced.  He has an Associate Degree in
Electronics.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Engineer Technician II and
is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Statement of Reasons sets forth fourteen separate creditors totaling
approximately $17,278.00.  The Applicant admits allegations 1(a), 1(b), 1(e), 1(f), 1(g),
1(I), 1(j), 1(k), 1(l), 1(m) and 1(n) of the SOR.  He denies allegations 1(c), 1(d) and 1(h)
of the SOR.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated April 10, 2007, January 7, 2008,
January 24, 2008, and April 24, 2008, reflect each of the delinquent debts listed in the
SOR.  (See Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4 and 5).
The Applicant testified that as a result of a business loss of $11,000.00 when he
was self-employed from May to December of 2006, a period of disability from December
2005 to May 2006, (caused by cracking several vertebrae in his neck), and a divorce in
July 2004, he became excessively indebted and could not afford to pay his bills.  (See
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 7 and 8).  The divorce decree stated that he and his
ex-wife would jointly file bankruptcy to resolve the indebtedness from the marriage.  The
Applicant’s ex-wife filed Bankruptcy, but the Applicant did not.  As a result, all of the
debt from the marriage became his sole responsibility.   
In an effort to resolve his indebtedness, the Applicant contacted a consumer
credit counselor in February 2008, to assist in paying off his outstanding debts.  (See
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 9).  He made three initial payments of $219.40 a month
which were electronically transferred from his bank account for the service.  The
consumer counselor had still done nothing to resolve the Applicant’s indebtedness.  The
Applicant then hired a second firm to assist him in his debt resolution.  After paying this
firm about $1,100.00, and receiving no service, he terminated his agreement with them
and decided to handle his financial situation himself.  (Tr. pp. 48 - 53).  
Rather than pay his bills piece meal or a little at a time, the Applicant  borrowed
approximately $14,000.00 from his parents to pay his bills.  He has paid all of the debt
set forth in the SOR except allegations 1(f), 1(g), 1(j) and 1(k).  (See Applicant’s Exhibits
3
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 and 2).  With regard
to the outstanding debt, he has set up payment plans and is making regular monthly
payments to resolve the indebtedness.  (See Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 3, 4, 5, 6
and 8.  He plans to continue with the payments until he is completely debt free.  He is
current with all of his other monthly expenses, including his child support and alimony.
He is working overtime as much as possible to get his bills paid off sooner.   
Letters of recommendation from professional colleagues of the Applicant attest to
his professionalism, dependability, high level of integrity and good judgment.  He is
considered to be a valuable asset in the company.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit I).  
The Applicant’s supervisor and a coworker testified on that the Applicant is
considered punctual, responsible, knowledgeable, and a true asset to the company in
every respect.  (Tr. pp. 87 - 95). 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
4
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
5
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant his a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.  The Applicant’s poor financial history was caused by a
combination of unfortunate events.  A business loss, a period of disability and a divorce
caused his excessive indebtedness.  With regard to this delinquent debt, the Applicant
has now either paid off the debt, or has set up payment plans and is making regular
monthly payments to resolve them.  He plans to continue paying the debt until it is paid
in full.  In addition, he has reduced his spending and is working as much overtime as
possible to get the debt resolved as quickly as possible.  He understands the
importance of paying his bills on time and not living beyond his means.  Under the
circumstances, he has made a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness, and there is
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has demonstrated that he can
properly handle his financial affairs.  In the event that the Applicant does not continue to
pay his delinquent debts according to the payment plan or sooner if possible, his
security clearance will be in immediate jeopardy.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation; and 19.(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ration,
and/or other financial analysis apply.  Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
6
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply.    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating
that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
This Applicant has paid or is currently paying his delinquent debt.  He has
demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the eligibility requirements for
access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 for the Government's Statement of Reasons.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1 For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.k: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.l: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.m: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.n: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.o: For the Applicant.
7
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
