1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )     ISCR Case No. 07-14179
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 31, 2007. On February 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the
security concerns under Guideline F that provided the basis for its action to deny him a
security clearance and refer the matter to an administrative judge. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense as of
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 14, 2008. He answered
the SOR allegations in writing on March 4, 2008. On April 16, 2008, he requested a
decision without a hearing. On June 16, 2008, the government submitted a File of
Relevant Material (FORM) consisting of seven exhibits (Items 1-7). DOHA forwarded a
2
copy of the FORM to Applicant and instructed him to respond within 30 days of receipt.
No response was received by the July 24, 2008, due date. On August 15, 2008, the
case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him. Based upon a review of the
government’s FORM, including Applicant’s Answer to the SOR allegations (Item 2),
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
DOHA alleged under Guideline F, financial considerations, that Applicant owes
delinquent federal student loan debt totaling credit card debt totaling $27,620 (SOR ¶¶
1.a through 1.f). Applicant admitted the debts (Item 2). After considering the evidence of
record, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 32-year-old associate designer who has worked for a defense
contractor since September 2006. The available record does not show that he has ever
held a security clearance (Item 4).
Applicant attended college from August 1994 to July 2001. While in school, he
worked as a lot attendant for a home improvement retailer. In about January 2001, he
was fired for refusing to perform a task. He then worked as a forklift operator, staying on
the job for almost two years after he earned his bachelor of science degree. In about
May 2003, he began working as a driver, initially for a company contracted to deliver
packages for a major shipping company. He was involuntarily terminated for time clock
issues in November 2003 but found work as a driver for another company. In
September 2003, he entered the defense sector as a trainee designer for his present
employer (Item 4).
Needing a security clearance for his duties, Applicant executed an e-QIP on
January 31, 2007. He disclosed under section 22 concerning his employment record
that he had been fired from previous jobs in January 2001 and in May 2003. In
response to section 27 concerning his financial record, Applicant indicated a judgment
had been awarded against him in August 2003, and a wage garnishment action had
been initiated in May 2005, to recover about $35,000 in delinquent federal student
loans. Applicant also listed the delinquent student loan debt in response to questions 28
a. “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 28
b. “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Item 4).
A check of Applicant’s credit on February 28, 2007, revealed that he had
defaulted on six federal student loans taken out between November 1995 and
November 1998 totaling $20,000. In April 2004, an aggregate debt balance of $25,694
was referred for collection. As of January 2007, he owed about $26,613 in student loan
debt. He was making timely payments of $264 per month on an auto loan taken out in
June 2004 for $11,619, and had no outstanding credit card debt. A delinquent credit
card debt of $439 had been referred for collection in July 2006, but he paid it in October
2006 (Item 5).
The file available for review does not include any statement from Applicant or any report from the investigator1
about the interview. In its interrogatories to Applicant of November 2007, DOHA referenced an interview of
May 23, 2007, during which Applicant had apparently indicated a willingness to resolve his indebtedness, and
asked him to furnish documentation of efforts made to resolve his debts (see Item 6). W hen he responded to
the interrogatories, Applicant did not deny that he had been interviewed in May 2007 or that he had expressed
at that time a willingness to resolve his debts.
3
During an interview with a government investigator on or about May 23, 2007,1
Applicant expressed his willingness to resolve his indebtedness. Asked by DOHA to
document repayment of his six delinquent student loans, Applicant indicated on
November 20, 2007, that his loan debt had been consolidated. The assignee collecting
the student loan debt had garnished his pay with his previous employer. To avoid
another garnishment, he promised to pay the collection agency at least $150 per month.
While he had been given an option to rehabilitate his loans out of default status on
payment of $360 per month for nine months, Applicant averred he could not afford it. He
expressed his intent to enroll in the rehabilitation payment option by May 2008:
After my interview, I immediately contacted [the collection agency] to
discuss my account as presented above. I started by making a May and
June payment of $150 each. I paid by money order and have enclosed a
copy of my May receipt. Unfortunately, I mailed the June receipt with the
money order. I did not make any more since then because I never got any
confirmation of my payments. Therefore, I continued to communicate with
[the collection agency] to verify my two payments. The payments did not
show up in their system until October. They did receive my May payment,
but did not receive my June payment. It was probably a mistake on my
part because I do not remember putting my social security number on the
money order as instructed before. As of now, I plan to make a November
payment and will continue to do so until May 2008. Then I plan to proceed
in enrolling in the credit rehabilitation program.
Applicant provided DOHA with a copy of one money order receipt showing a $150
payment on May 28, 2007 (Item 6).
A subsequent check of Applicant’s credit on January 28, 2008, showed Applicant
had paid off his old car loan in April 2007. He had taken out a new vehicle loan of
$16,743 in March 2007. The loan, which was being repaid on time at $309 per month,
had an outstanding balance of $15,385 as of December 2007. His student loans were
still in collection with a total balance of $27,640 (Item 7).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:
Applicant’s credit report of January 28, 2008 (Item 7) shows the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f to be $1,726 rather than2
the $1,706 alleged. This would explain the $20 discrepancy between the amount of total student loan debt
listed on the credit report and that alleged in the SOR. 
As Department Counsel correctly noted, Applicant presented proof of only the May 2007 payment.3
5
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant owes about $27,640 in delinquent federal student loan debt that has
been in default since at least April 2004.  Significant security concerns are raised by2
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” (AG ¶ 19(a)) and by “a history of not meeting
financial obligations” (AG ¶ 19(c)).
AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) clearly does not apply
given he has not even managed to rehabilitate the loans. While it appears that he held a
series of blue collar jobs as a forklift operator and then as a driver even after he earned
his B.S. degree, he did not provide sufficient evidence to implicate AG ¶ 20(b) (“the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances”). He failed to provide any income or living expenses figures
that might have excused his inaction on his student loans.
What little is known about his financial situation is that his monthly car payments
increased by $45 after he took out a new car loan of $16,743 in March 2007. This car
loan raises questions of self-interest in the absence of any evidence showing need for a
new vehicle. He made no payments on his delinquent student loans until after his
interview with a government investigator in May 2007, and he failed to follow through on
promises made to the agency collecting the student loan debt. Offered an option to
rehabilitate his student loans by making nine consecutive monthly payments of $366,
Applicant countered that he would pay $150 monthly as he could not afford the full
$366. By November 2007, he had made two payments at most, which were in May and
June 2007.  Even if I accept that he was justified in not making any additional payments3
until the creditor verified receipt in October 2007, Applicant told DOHA in November
2007 that he would resume the $150 monthly payment until May 2008 when he would
then start the process of rehabilitating his loans. There is no evidence that Applicant
made any payments in November 2007 or thereafter, despite the fact that he was
notified of the government’s concerns in the February 2008 SOR and again in the June
2008 FORM. Under the circumstances, I am unable to apply either AG ¶ 20(c) (“the
6
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”) or AG ¶ 20(d) (“the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts”).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed
at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
The government must be assured that those persons with classified access can
be counted on to exercise good judgment at all times. Although Applicant has been
candid about his defaulted student loan debt, he remains under a significant debt
burden that is not likely to resolve in the foreseeable future. As of May 2007, he could
not afford the $366 monthly payment necessary to rehabilitate his loans. Based on the
record before me, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                                        
________________________
ELIZABETH M. MATCHINSKI
Administrative Judge
