                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18698 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, but failed to mitigate them under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 11, 2008, denied all the 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 23, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2008, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 20, 2008. The government offered 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 which admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through N which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 2, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s statements made as to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated 
herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He came to the U.S. in 1995 after he was exiled from 
his native country of Cameroon and was a refugee from Nigeria. He was a pro-
democracy student leader and the U.S. offered him the opportunity to immigrate. 
Applicant immediately enrolled in college to learn English. He received a database 
software certificate at a community college and a master’s in business administration in 
2000.1 He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001. Applicant married in 2000 and 
separated from his wife in March 2006. Their divorce was final on June 28, 2008. He 
has a six-year-old son from the marriage.  
 
 In 2003, Applicant set up an information technology consulting corporation where 
he was the President and its only employee. This corporation had its own business 
credit card which Applicant used to make purchases such as furniture, office supplies, 
and computer equipment. He did not use this credit card for personal use. Applicant 
operated the corporation out of his home. He stated he relied on the money made 
through the corporation to pay the corporation’s bills. When asked “did you give any 
thought to if you couldn’t pay the bills, how they were going to get paid? His response 
was “not really.” He presently is working as employee of a government contractor.2  
 
 In June 2006 Applicant bought a house for $647,000. He used $20,000 cash for 
a down payment. His monthly mortgage payments were $5,600. At the time his 
corporation had a contract where he was being paid approximately $18,000 a month. 
He lost the contract and was unemployed from August 2006 to October 23, 2006. He 
continued to make his mortgage payments. Although he was separated from his wife 
and child when he purchased the house, he explained he purchased the large house to 
use as an investment, hoping to sell it in the future for a profit. He also purchased it to 
help other Cameroon immigrants, by providing them a temporary residence. He would 
provide his home as temporary shelter. None of the temporary residents contributed to 
the expenses associated with the house. Applicant estimated that he donates 
approximately $500 to $1,000 a month to assist the residents. This money is a gift and 
not a loan, so it is not repaid.3  
 
1 It is unknown if Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in Cameroon or from another institution.  
 
2 Tr. 40-46, 51-55, 72-75. 
 
3 Tr. 59-62,106-114-117, 132-139. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s taxes increased on the house, increasing his escrow account and his 
monthly mortgage payment by about $500. He resumed employment in October 2006 
until November 2007, earning approximately $12,000 net income a month. Applicant 
began falling behind on his mortgage payments in June 2007. He changed jobs and 
was employed for a few weeks before he realized the job was not as described. He was 
unemployed approximately three months from December 2007 to February 2008 and 
began working full time in March 2008. His current net income per month is 
approximately $12,000. His house was foreclosed on August 28, 2007. Appellant owes 
the mortgage company $11,289 as alleged in SOR ¶1.d. He has not made any 
payments on this debt, but stated he intends to file for bankruptcy to discharge this debt 
after he pays other delinquent debts.4  
 
 Appellant made payments to settle the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶1.c, 1.e. and 
1.f. They have been resolved and satisfied.5  
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶1.a is for a credit card account. Applicant has made 
one $50 payment toward this charged off debt of $3,607. He stated he has a verbal 
agreement with the credit card company to begin making $50 monthly payments in 
September 2008. He bought a laptop computer, software and other computer hardware 
with this credit card.6  
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶1.b is a credit card debt that was charged off for 
$12,531. Applicant stated that it was a business credit card for his corporation. Furniture 
and office supplies were charged to the account in 2006. Applicant admitted he is 
responsible for paying the debt. No information was provided to show that the debt was 
a business account loss or that Applicant is not responsible for this debt. It is unclear 
why Applicant did not pay this debt in 2006 when he was employed or since then. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this debt, but stated he intended to pay it off. 
He stated he had a verbal agreement with the company to pay the debt. His corporation 
has not done any work since 2006.7  
 
 Applicant stated that he intended to pay both delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶1.a and 
1.b and intended to file for bankruptcy to resolve the foreclosure debt in SOR ¶1.d. He 
has not contacted the creditor regarding this debt. These three debts total 
approximately $27,370. He stated he expected to pay off the two credit card debts in 
approximately 16 months by paying $1,000 a month. Applicant spoke to an attorney 
while his house was being foreclosed, but never retained one. He did not seek financial 
4 Tr. 35-37, 59-62, 76-82, 106-109. 
 
5 Tr. 18-26; 56-59, 70; GE 4; AE B, E and I reflect payments on SOR 1.c. AE F, G, H, J. L, M 
reflect payments on SOR 1.f. One final payment is due on August 30, 2008. Applicant pays this debt by 
automatic deduction from his bank account. AE D, K, and N reflect payments for SOR 1.e. 
 
6 Tr. 28-30, 55-56. 
 
7 Tr. 30-35, 72-74. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
counseling. He has an accountant that prepares his tax returns who advised him 
against filing for bankruptcy and that he should only do it as a last resort.8  
 
 Applicant’s present net monthly income is approximately $12,000. He rents a 
house for $3,000 a month. He has about $900 in savings. His other monthly expenses 
are: car payment, $867; student loan, $258 (balance approximately $53,000); alimony, 
$1,000; child support, $1,200; electricity, $200; car insurance, $235; telephone, $200;9 
cable services, $200; gas, $400; lawn service, $50; and food/restaurants, $1,500.10 In 
addition, he sends $1,000 a month to his family in Cameroon. He donates at least 
$2,000 to $3,000 a year to a charity that he runs for helping Cameroon citizens. He 
stated that in 2006 he donated approximately $10,000 to this charity. In 2007, he 
estimated he donated $2,000 to $3,000. In 2008, he estimated he donated 
approximately $2,000 to date. He donates another $500 to $1,000 to help friends and 
Cameroon countrymen if they have a financial need. He recently (two weeks ago) gave 
his girlfriend $500 to help with her school expenses. In addition, in the last eight weeks 
he spent an additional $200 a week to pay for his son’s swimming camp. He owes his 
wife’s lawyer $10,000 for the cost of the divorce. Applicant has already paid his divorce 
attorney, but has decided to appeal the settlement and has made an initial payment of 
$1,000 toward a retainer for an appellate attorney. It is not known how much more the 
fees will entail. He has no retirement accounts or investments. Applicant does not have 
a budget.11  
 
 Appellant credibly testified that when he completed his security clearance 
application (SCA) he was told to only list government debts. He believed the debt listed 
in SOR ¶1.b was the responsibility of the corporation and did not need to be listed. 
Although he was aware of the debt in SOR ¶1.a he did not believe he had to list it. I find 
Applicant did not intentionally fail to divulge the requested information on his SCA. 
English is not his native language and he credibly testified that he misunderstood what 
he was to divulge.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 Tr. 26, 30-39, 82-86. 
 
9 He pays for his girlfriend’s telephone service by allowing her to be on a family plan.  
 
10 Applicant stated he does not cook so he eats at restaurants a lot. 
 
11 Tr. 87-106-127, 132-136. 
 
12 Tr. 40-48. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
 
6 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”); (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”); and (e) 
(“consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive 
indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other 
financial analysis”). Despite having the income and assets to resolve his delinquent 
debts Applicant has not done so and they remain unpaid. Applicant earns a significant 
income and although he has paid some of his smaller debts since his security clearance 
became an issue, he has not addressed the three largest debts. Applicant has not made 
an effort to reflect on his expenditures and create a budget. He donates a great deal of 
money for worthy causes, but does so to the detriment of his creditors. Based on his 
discretionary income it does not appear Applicant is willing to make lifestyle changes 
and prioritize paying his delinquent debts. I find all three disqualifying conditions have 
been raised. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the individual has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”). 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because his three largest delinquent debts remain 
unpaid and it does not appear he has made budget or lifestyle changes to pay them in a 
timely manner. Applicant has the ability to pay his delinquent debts, but he has made 
choices on how he is spending his money. Paying his delinquent debts is not his top 
priority. His conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
find (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did have periods of unemployment and went through a divorce. In 
order for (b) to apply Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant was earning a significant income of $18,000 a month when he lost the 
contract and was unemployed for three months. When he returned to work he was 
earning less, but enough, if he budgeted his money to pay his bills. I cannot find 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. Therefore, I find (b) only partially 
applies.  
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has paid three of his creditors. He hopes to pay two others in the future 
and file for bankruptcy to discharge the deficiency amount on his foreclosed mortgage. I 
do not find that he has exercised a good faith effort to resolve all of his delinquent debts. 
Applicant has the financial ability to pay his creditors, but he needs to budget his income 
and make some lifestyle changes. He has not done so. There is no evidence Applicant 
has received any financial counseling to help him resolve his financial problems. 
Therefore I cannot find (c) or (d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities”). I have considered all of the facts 
and find Applicant did not deliberately omit, conceal, or intentionally mislead and falsify 
information on his SCA. Applicant was advised to only list his government debts and he 
believed he did not have to list such debts. Applicant’s native language is not English 
and communicating and understanding the intricacies of the SCA was confusing. I found 
his testimony was credible and do not believe he intentionally omitted pertinent 
information. I find none of the disqualifying conditions apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is obviously a very 
benevolent person. He contributes to a charity to help his former countrymen. He 
provides temporary residence for them and gives them money when they need it. He 
also sends money to his family back in Cameroon. These are all admirable acts of 
generosity. However, Applicant also has financial obligations to creditors that he 
promised to pay and is obligated to pay. He has not adjusted his budget to ensure they 
receive payments. He does not have a working budget. He has expendable income that 
if budgeted properly he could responsibly pay his creditors. He has not done this. 
Rather he intends to file bankruptcy to satisfy the foreclosure debt on his house and he 
plans to start paying $50 a month on a debt that is more than $12,000. He also stated 
he planned on paying $1,000 on these debts, but had not begun making regular 
payments, regardless of the amount promised. Applicant has the means to resolve his 
financial problems, but has not changed his priorities. His nominal effort raises 
questions about his judgment and reliability. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
