 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13602 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), 
raised by Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on April 26, 2008. On 
March 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated document and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. DOHA received his answer on April 15, 2008. On April 
29, 2008, Department Counsel requested a hearing (Tr. 16; Hearing Exhibit (HX) II). 
(HX I is discussed below.) Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 12, 2008, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 14, 2008. Scheduling of the hearing was 
delayed by Applicant’s deployment to Iraq. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 23, 
2008, scheduling the hearing for August 19, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 
A through D, which were admitted without objection.  
 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until September 19, 2008, 
to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX E, F, and G, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments concerning AX E, F, 
and G are attached to the record as HX III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
August 27, 2008. On September 2, 2008, Applicant sent an email stating he had no 
further evidence to submit (HX IV). The record closed on September 2, 2008. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iraq (HX I). I took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel (Tr. 
23). The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 2, DOHA interrogatories that included a 
personal subject interview extracted from a report of investigation, without calling an 
authenticating witness as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the 
authentication requirement to Applicant and he waived it (Tr. 31). Based on his 
affirmative waiver of the authentication requirement, I admitted GX 2 (Tr. 32).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant admitted the allegations 
and offered explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He was 
educated in Iraq, where he received a bachelor’s degree in English literature. He 
worked as a linguist and program researcher for the Iraqi National Congress, an agency 
funded by the U.S. and composed of political groups opposed to Saddam Hussein, from 
March 1994 to August 1996 (Tr. 40, 46-48). His job was to translate English-language 
television broadcasts such as CNN and the BBC. He worked for the Iraqi National 
Congress because it offered a well-paying job, not for political reasons (Tr. 47-48).  
 
 
3 
 
 
When persons associated with the Iraqi National Congress were threatened by 
Saddam Hussein, Applicant was evacuated by the U.S. military to Turkey and then to 
Guam in September 1996 (GX 2 at 11). While in Guam he volunteered to be a translator 
for the refugees from Iraq (Tr. 40). He was granted political asylum in the U.S. in 
February 1997.  
 
Applicant married a U.S. citizen in August 2000, and he became a U.S. citizen in 
February 2006. He and his wife have two children, ages seven and six. One of his sons 
is autistic and requires considerable attention (Tr. 70). He has two stepchildren from his 
wife’s first marriage, ages 19 and 17. His wife does not work outside the home. They 
live in the house owned by Applicant’s wife, which she acquired as part of a divorce 
settlement (Tr. 68). 
 
 Applicant was briefly employed by a defense contractor from April to June 2006, 
but was terminated when his application for an interim clearance was denied (GX 2 at 
7). The denial was based on concerns about his travel to Iraq in March 2005 without a 
passport. He subsequently established that he traveled to Iraq using a travel document 
issued by the Department of Homeland Security in lieu of a passport (AX B). He 
received an interim clearance in December 2006 (Tr. 6).  
 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since January 2007 (Tr. 42) and 
has been deployed to Iraq since August 2007. His duties involve translation of materials 
associated with the capture of high profile criminals who direct or conduct acts of 
violence against Coalition Forces. His team chief regards him as talented and 
completely loyal (Answer to SOR). His current site manager describes him as having an 
“overwhelming sense of duty” and so skillful that he is sought out for “hot” issues and 
special projects (AX F). His detachment chief describes him as “an inspiring example of 
selfless service” who has performed flawlessly (AX G). He received a certificate of 
appreciation for his performance in March 2008 (AX D). He also has received three unit 
coins, given as traditional military expressions of appreciation by U.S. military units (Tr. 
74).  
 
 Applicant’s family members live in the Kurdish region in northern Iraq, an area he 
considers relatively safe (Tr. 43, 66-67). None of Applicant’s family members are 
connected to the government of Iraq. He does not work near his family and is not 
allowed to visit them. His family members believe he is living and working in the U.S. 
(Tr. 44).  
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iraq. His father is a retired truck 
driver and his mother is a homemaker (Tr. 53-54; GX 2 at 10). His parents are both 80 
years old. He traveled to Iraq in March 2005 for three weeks to visit his parents, after 
not seeing them for nine years, because they are elderly, he missed them, and he was 
not sure when he would have another opportunity to visit them (GX 2 at 3).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s three sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq, and all three are 
homemakers. The husband of one sister owns a small restaurant, one is a truck driver, 
and one is a crane operator (Tr. 60-63; GX 2 at 10-11).  
 
Three of Applicant’s five brothers are citizens and residents of Iraq. Two brothers 
live with their parents (Tr. 54). One of these two brothers sells clothing and the other 
works in a bank (Tr. 56, 59). The third brother is married and is a cab driver (Tr. 54-55).  
 
Two of Applicant’s brothers left Iraq as refugees. One brother now lives in 
Germany and works in a fast food restaurant (Tr. 58). The other brother is a citizen and 
resident of the Netherlands, and he is employed by a seafood company (Tr. 56-57).  
 
All of Applicant’s married siblings have children, some of whom are adults. He 
has about 12 nieces and nephews in Iraq. None of his siblings or their children are 
connected to the Iraqi government. 
 
Applicant works in a military compound and is not allowed to leave the compound 
or to accompany troops on combat missions (Tr. 67). He contacts his family by 
telephone or by email, but he uses the telephone only when he is in the U.S. He does 
not call his family from Iraq (Tr. 64). If his family calls his home in the U.S. while he is 
deployed, his wife tells them he is “at work,” but she does not tell them where he is (Tr. 
64). 
 
When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in December 2006, he 
was contacting his parents and the two brothers who live with them about once a month 
by telephone, and he was contacting his two married brothers once or twice a month. 
He did not maintain regular contact with his sisters (GX 2 at 3). Since his deployment, 
Applicant’s family contacts have been less frequent. He last talked to his parents in 
December 2007 (Tr. 67).  
 
I have taken administrative notice of the following facts. In 2003, a U.S.-led 
coalition of military forces removed Saddam Hussein and his Ba’athist party from power. 
A new Iraqi constitution was adopted in 2005, establishing a constitutional democracy 
and guaranteeing all Iraqis basic human rights. In March 2006, a freely elected 
government took office. The U.S. government strongly supports the government of Iraq 
with military forces and economic assistance. The policy of the U.S. is to help Iraq build 
“a constitutional, representative government that respects the human rights of all Iraqis 
and has security forces capable of maintaining order and preventing the country from 
becoming a safe haven for terrorists and foreign fighters.”1 Weak performance by the 
Iraqi government in upholding the rule of law has resulted in widespread human rights 
abuses, including: “a pervasive climate of violence; misappropriation of official authority 
by sectarian, criminal, terrorist and insurgent groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances; torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.”2 Widespread violence, principally inflicted by insurgent and terrorist 
                                                          
1 U.S. Dept. of State, Background Note: Iraq, Feb. 2008 at 8. 
2 U.S. Dept. of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2007: Iraq, Mar. 11, 2008 at 1. 
 
5 
 
 
groups, remains a serious problem. Although there is no evidence that Iraq conducts 
intelligence operations against the U.S., terrorist groups operating in Iraq target U.S. 
citizens and U.S. interests in Iraq.3 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
                                                          
3 U.S. Dept. of State, Country Specific Information, Iraq, Jan. 22, 2008 at 2. 
 
6 
 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s mother, father, brothers, and sisters are citizens 
and residents of Iraq (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b); he traveled to Iraq in March 2005 to visit his 
parents (SOR ¶ 1.c); and he was a translator for the Iraqi National Congress from 1994 
to 1996 (SOR ¶ 1.d). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as 
follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
 
7 
 
 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant’s travel to Iraq in March 2005 was solely to visit his aging parents. His 
foreign travel has no independent security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 
(App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
 Applicant’s employment by the Iraqi National Congress was not a political act. It 
occurred while he was a citizen and resident of Iraq. The organization was financed and 
supported by the U.S. to orchestrate the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, and it no longer 
exists. Applicant’s employment by the Iraqi National Congress raises no enumerated 
disqualifying conditions, but it is relevant to his current vulnerability to exploitation, 
pressure, or coercion by former members of the Ba’athist party or its sympathizers. His 
vulnerability based on former employment is discussed below under the whole person 
concept. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 The crux of this case is Applicant’s family ties to Iraq. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). The presence of Applicant’s many family 
members, especially his parents and siblings, in Iraq creates the “heightened risk” 
contemplated by AG ¶ 7(a). The widespread violence among the various terrorist, 
insurgent, and criminal elements raises the potential conflict of interest contemplated by 
AG ¶ 7(b). I conclude both of these disqualifying conditions are raised. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 
8 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant has numerous family members in Iraq, maintains contact 
with his parents and brothers, and has feelings of affection and obligation for them. 
Although the U.S. and Iraq are allies, the level of violence instigated by terrorists and 
insurgents in Iraq is high. Applicant believes the Kurdish region of Iraq where they live is 
relatively safe, but his family is still at significant risk. I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s family ties are not “minimal,” but he has developed “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.”  
 
Applicant has been married to a U.S. citizen for more than eight years. He has 
two children and two stepchildren who are U.S. citizens. He has been a U.S. citizen 
since February 2006. His home, family, and financial resources are in the U.S.  
 
Applicant has been employed by defense contractors since April 2006 and 
deployed as a translator for the U.S. forces since August 2007. He volunteered for 
arduous duty in a combat zone, leaving behind his American family, including his 
autistic son. He has handled numerous sensitive documents without incident. His 
supervisors have been impressed by his loyalty, “overwhelming sense of duty,” and 
“selfless service.” He has concealed his presence in Iraq from his Iraqi family members. 
His deployment has made it difficult to keep in contact with his family members in Iraq, 
including his aging parents, but he has meticulously adhered to the constraints of his 
job. He has demonstrated his loyalty to the U.S. by his actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-
00034, 208 WL 681980 at *2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (proven record of action in 
defense of U.S. “very important”); ISCR Case No. 04-12363, 2006 WL 2725061 at *2 
(App. Bd. Jul. 14 2006) (Applicant “invaluable in the war on terrorism”). I conclude AG ¶ 
8(b) is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who demonstrated an affinity for the Western culture 
by studying English literature while a college student in Iraq. He fled Iraq to escape from 
the terrorist and insurgent elements now trying to undermine the government. He met 
and married a native-born American three years after entering the U.S. as a refugee.  
 
 Applicant volunteered to serve with U.S. forces in a combat zone. While his 
duties do not subject him to direct combat operations, his former employment with the 
Iraqi National Congress way well subject him to personal danger from former Ba’athist 
party members and sympathizers if his presence in Iraq were revealed.  
 
 Applicant was very candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He understands 
that a security clearance creates a special obligation based on trust. In his closing 
statement, he demonstrated his understanding that a clearance is a beginning, not an 
end: “[If] you want to harm, you will harm the country no matter what kind of clearance 
you have” (Tr. 83).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
