1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-16841
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                            
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 3,
2006. On March 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F, E and
J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 10, 2008 . He answered
the SOR in writing on March 12, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
On June 24, 2008, Applicant shipped additional evidence. The shipper delivered the materials, but for some1
reason returned the documents to Applicant. Applicant resent the documents to Department Counsel on July
7, 2008. See AE F (Documents verifying shipping issues). Department Counsel compiled the documentation,
then reviewed it. The Department Counsel prepared a response, including objections to certain submissions.
I received all documentation on July 25, 2008.
AE F, supra note 1; AE G (Opinion memorandum from Attorney, dated May 11, 2006 and Letter dated May2
12, 2006); AE H (1099 forms); AE I through AE N (Letters to various mortgage holders on the rental
properties, dated May 22, 2006 and June 9, 2006); AE O (Three complaint letters to State agencies, dated
November 15, 2006); AE P (Letter to credit bureau, dated June 20, 2008); AE Q (Credit report, dated June
7, 2008); AE R (memo Applicant); AE S (unsigned stipulation); AE T (Letter on utility bill); AE U (Last five
months current credit card statements on a joint account); AE V (Federal and state tax returns for 2005, 2006,
and 2007).
2
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on March 17, 2008. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 17, 2008, and I received the case
assignment on April 21, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 19, 2008, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on June 3, 2008. The government offered four
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant and two witness testified on his behalf. He submitted five exhibits
(AE) A through E, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 13, 2008. I held the record
open until July 2, 2008, for Applicant to submit additional matters.  Applicant timely1
submitted 17 additional documents, which are marked as AE F through V. All are
admitted into evidence.  The record closed on July 2, 2008. 2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Since the hearing notice was mailed 15 days before the hearing, Applicant did
not receive the notice as required under the Directive. I advised Applicant of his right
under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the hearing notice 15 days before the hearing.
Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice. (Tr. 8.) 
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.bb, alleging
Applicant owes $20,000 to his former attorneys since mid-2007, which has not been
paid. (Tr. 170.) Applicant objected to the motion, arguing that this creditor has not
sought payment because of his current financial problems. I granted the government’s
motion. (Id.)
Evidentiary rulings
The government objects to the admission of AE S on the grounds it is undated,
unsigned, and incomplete. Applicant has not responded. The government’s concerns
are valid. I, however, will admit this document and accord it less weight because of
Response to SOR, dated March 12, 2008.3
GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application, dated November 3, 2006) at 22-23; Tr. 15.4
Tr. 15-17.5
GE 4 (Credit report, November 17, 2006); Tr. 17-18.6
3
these deficiencies The government also objects to AE U (Referenced by government
counsel as APHS Z through EE) on the grounds the document is incomplete because it
is missing pages. Applicant has not responded to the government’s objections. Again,
the government has raised valid concerns. Given that the most important information in
this exhibit is page one of each month’s statement, AE U is admitted into evidence.
Late on September 5, 2008, Applicant faxed a letter to me ex parte. I received
the letter on September 9, 2008 and immediately notified Department Counsel. I
instructed Department Counsel to respond to the letter no later than Thursday,
September 11, 2008, which has been done.  Department Counsel objects to the
admission of this letter as character evidence because the record closed on July 2,
2008 and the government has no ability to cross-examine the author of the letter. The
government does not object to the letter if it is deemed a request to expedite the
decision in this case. Given that the record closed on July 2, 2008, I decline to admit the
letter. Applicant’s request to expedite the decision is moot. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 12, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.z and 1.aa of the SOR, and 1.bb of the amended SOR. His answer to
¶ 1.v does not specifically admit the allegation. He neither admitted or denied the
allegation in ¶ 1.w, which will be treated as a denial. He denied the remaining factual
allegations in the SOR.3
Applicant, who is 62 years old, owns and operates a company which is a
contractor to the Department of Defense. He has held a top secret clearance in the
past.4
Applicant and his wife married 43 years ago. They have two adult children and
five grandchildren. He worked for an engineering firm for five years. He left this
company thirty years ago and started his own business, which provides information
operations and strategic communications to the Department of Defense.5
For many years, Applicant operated his business with credit lines based on his
credit rating and work contracts. He had no problem paying his bills.  6
In 2005, a real estate broker in his office building approached Applicant about
purchasing rental property. Initially, Applicant declined. After discussing the matter with
AE L, supra note 2, at 1; AE M, supra note 2, at 2; AE N, supra note 2, at 1.7
Id.; Tr. 20-21.8
Id.9
AE L, supra note 2, at 1; AE M, supra note 2, at 2; AE N, supra note 2, at 1.10
4
this individual and based on assurances about financing, Applicant agreed to purchase
22 rental properties. The rental properties consisted primarily of single family homes.7
As part of the agreement between the real estate broker and Applicant, the real
estate broker agreed to sell the property at 10% below current market value. The real
estate broker advised that all properties were rented and that Applicant would not have
any out-of-pocket expenses for the investment. The real estate broker promised to pay
the down payments for the new loans, pay all closing costs, and cover any shortfall
between the loan payments and rental receipts on the properties for one year.8
The real estate broker obtained an appraisal on each property through an
appraiser he knew and financing through a mortgage broker known to him. The
mortgage broker secured 100% financing on each property through a primary mortgage
and a secondary mortgage. Beginning in February 2006, the sales on these properties
proceeded to settlement. During this process, Applicant learned that the properties were
titled in the name of the real estate broker’s wife. At the final closings, the wife refused
to sign the agreement that provided for the real estate broker to pay the difference
between the monthly mortgage and the rent received on each property. The real estate
broker then declined to sign the agreement. Applicant lacked the financial resources to
pay the difference, a fact known to the real estate broker.9
Subsequent to the settlement, Applicant’s hired an attorney to review all the
documents related to this sale. The attorney found serious irregularities in the overall
transaction, including inflated purchase prices based on false appraisals, prior sales
listing on the properties at a much lower market value, properties without renters, failure
to disclose to the lenders total financing package as required, and the bankruptcy filing
by the real estate broker. Based on his review, the attorney concluded that the real
estate broker, along with his wife, the mortgage broker, and appraiser, “orchestrated an
elaborate scheme to relieve himself and/or his wife of poorly performing properties by
misleading [Applicant] into buying the properties under false pretenses.” Although the
record does not provide clear evidence on when Applicant defaulted on these
mortgages, the evidence of record is clear Applicant could not meet his mortgage
obligations after the final closing.  10
On May 22, 2006 and June 9, 2006, Applicant’s attorney wrote to the lenders
holding the mortgage. His attorney advised the mortgage lender that the real estate
broker and his wife would not fulfill their promises to pay the mortgage differentials. On
behalf of Applicant, the attorney informed each mortgage lender that Applicant desired
to work out a financial resolution to mitigate the damages caused the mortgage lenders
AE I, supra note 1; AE J - AE N, supra note 2; Tr. 22.11
AE E (Law firm tracking sheet on properties); AE G (Memorandum, dated May 11, 2006); Response to SOR;12
AE H (1099 forms); Tr. 52, 57, 63. Two documents which comprise AE B are included in AE H.
GE 4, supra note 6.13
GE 3 (Credit report, dated March 4, 2008); AE P (Challenges to credit report); AE Q (Credit report, dated14
June 7, 2008).
The three credit reports of record contain conflicting account numbers and information about these credit15
card debts. See GE 3, supra note 3; GE 4, supra note 6; AE Q, supra note 2. The account number in GE 4
and AE Q are the same, thus, these two documents reflect the most accurate information on these debts. The
account numbers in GE 3 are completely different from the account numbers in GE 4 and AE Q.
5
and Applicant by the scheme. Applicant  offered to pay the net rents on each mortgage
to the lender, to rent the vacant property, to cooperate with selling the properties, and to
pursue his claims against the real estate broker, his wife, the mortgage broker, and the
appraiser and share any recovery obtained with the mortgage lenders. In exchange, he
requested the lenders not to negatively impact his credit rating.  11
The lenders chose, instead, to foreclose on all the properties. All the properties
have been sold. Three law firms advised Applicant that he would not be liable for any
unpaid mortgage debt following the sale of these properties under the state’s anti-
deficiency statues because his loans were purchase money mortgages. See State
Statutes 33-701 et seq and 33-801 et seq. Two lenders notified the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) that Applicant had no personal liability on the mortgage debts. The
lenders only recourse in this situation is to list the debts on Applicant’s credit report.12
The November 17, 2006 credit report reflects that Applicant paid all his bills in a
timely manner and had done so for a long period of time. This included at least two
credit lines of $500,000 each. The report also shows that Applicant timely paid the
mortgages on two other rental properties he owned prior to his involvement in the 22
rental property scheme. The only negative information shown on this report involves the
mortgage foreclosures on the 22 rental properties.13
His March 2008 credit report reflects a major change in his financial situation
related to the mortgages on the rental property and two credit cards. His June 7, 2008
credit report shows a balance due on two corporate credit cards, and 18 mortgages,
many of which are second mortgages on the rental properties. His other debts are
timely paid and 24 mortgages have a zero balance (some of these mortgages are
related to his own home). On June 20, 2008, he filed a challenge to all the debts listed
on his credit report related to the mortgages and unpaid corporate credit cards.
Applicant pays one personal credit card on a monthly basis and has reduced his debt
on this card significantly.14
Applicant owes a significant amount of money on two credit cards he used in
business.   For both cards, he has started negotiations to resolve this debt. Because15
AE D (Undated letter); AE S (Draft stipulation); Tr. 42, 60-61.16
AE O (Complaint letters); Tr. 60-71, 143, 151.17
GE 2, (Interrogatories and answers) at 7; AE V (Tax returns); Tr. 35-35, 64-65, 125-127, 142. 18
Tr. 57, 62-64, 96-99.19
6
there are problems with fraudulent charges on the larger debt, the negotiations are not
complete. He has not provided evidence which shows that he has either paid the debts
or started a monthly payment plan. He provided a stipulation that indicates his
negotiation efforts on his largest credit card debt, but since the stipulation is not signed,
it is insufficient to show he has resolved this debt. He has developed a payment plan for
the unpaid utility bill. He also owes a law firm $20,000. The law firm considers him a
good credit risk and is working with him on the debt.   16
In November 2006, Applicant and his wife filed complaints with the State Board
of Appraisal, Department of Real Estate, and Department of Financial Institutions
alleging misconduct and fraud against the appraiser, real estate broker and his
company, and the mortgage broker and his company. The complaints are still active
with the state agencies. Although Applicant indicated he would pursue legal action
against the individuals and their companies involved in the fraud, he lacks the financial
resources to proceed with legal action. .17
Applicant earns a good income from his business. In 2006, his gross monthly
income totaled $25,000, his net monthly income totaled $18,750 and his expenses
totaled $16,300. His company paid $3,500 of his expenses. His current monthly income
is between $13,000 and $15,000 depending upon his business. His monthly expenses
remain the same. As President of his company, he takes no salary until he pays his
employees. Because of his current financial issues, his salary varies each month. He
continues to pay his personal expenses. He no longer operates his business on a line of
credit as the banks have withdrawn the lines of credit.18
Applicant discussed his liability for the mortgage loan debts with his attorneys.
Each told him he had no liability for any deficiency balances on the mortgages after
foreclosure. Applicant did not specifically ask his attorneys how he should answer
questions on his security clearance application (e-QIP). He asked a more general
question about what he should say if the issue comes up. When he completed his e-QIP
on November 3, 2006, he answered “no” to question 28 about financial delinquencies
because he understood from counsel that he did not owe this money. He knew that the
rental properties had been foreclosed at the time he answered this question.19
  Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
7
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2©,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
8
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt when the banks
foreclosed on mortgage loans for rental properties he innocently acquired in a fraud
scheme. He has been unable to repay the balance on the mortgage loans and credit
card debts for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose because of a fraudulent real estate scheme. There is little
likelihood he will venture into this type of real estate investment in the future. I find the
real estate investment in rental properties occurred under such unusual circumstances
that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not raise concerns about his current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. This mitigating condition fully applies to the
mortgage debts.
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above,
Applicant’s financial problems arose from a fraudulent real estate scheme. When he
realized he had problems with his investment, he immediately hired legal counsel.
Through his attorney, he sought to invalidate the investment deal and tried to work out a
resolution with the mortgagors. He also filed complaints against the perpetrators of the
fraud. These actions indicate he acted reasonably under the circumstances. This
mitigating condition is applicable to his rental properties and the mortgages for those
properties. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received financially counseling, thus, this
part of mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. Applicant, however, made a
9
good faith effort in 2006 to resolve the mortgage issues when he asked his attorneys to
make an offer on his behalf to work out the mortgage payment problems. The banks
refused to work with him, a factor he cannot control. There are also clear indications
that his mortgage debt problem is resolved or under control. He is trying to negotiate a
payment plan on his two remaining business credit card debts. While this debt is large,
in comparison to the total debts raised in the SOR, this unpaid debt is 10 % of the debts
alleged and Applicant has the financial resources to resolve the debts upon completion
of the negotiations. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions have some
applicability.
Finally, AG ¶ 20 (e) “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue” applies. Applicant challenged the listing of the unpaid
mortgage debts on his credit report. Given his attorneys advise that he does not owe
these debts under state law, he has a legitimate basis to challenge the debts. This
mitigating condition applies to the mortgage debts listed on his credit report.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct::
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16(a) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
The government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his SF-86
when he answered “no” to Question 28 a and b about his financial delinquencies. This
information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security
clearance and to his honesty. For this guideline to apply, Applicant’s omission must be
deliberate. He denies, however, that he deliberately falsified his answer to these
questions. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313320
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
10
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the
time the omission occurred.  For DC ¶ 16 (a) to apply, the government must establish20
that Applicant’s omission, concealment or falsification in his answer was deliberate.
At the time he completed his SF-86, Applicant knew the rental properties he
purchased earlier in 2006 had gone to foreclosure. Because he knew this information
would be relevant to his security clearance, he asked his attorneys about his liability on
these loans. His attorneys advised him that he did not owe any money on these
mortgage debts and had no personal liability on these debts. Thus, when he answered
Question 28 a and b, he did not believe he was delinquent in any debts related to the
mortgages on the foreclosed property. Based on the advice he received from his
attorneys, he was firmly convinced he had a valid defense to the debt payment and
owed no money as a result of the foreclosure. His other debts were all current when he
completed his e-QIP. The government has not established that Applicant intentionally
falsified his e-QIP. Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant.
Guideline  J, Personal Conduct
Since I found that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP, I find in favor of
Applicant on this Guideline.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Thirty years ago, Applicant started
11
his own communications business. Since that time, he built and successfully operated
his communications company. As his business grew, he hired staff, including financial
persons. When necessary, he retained legal counsel to handle his business affairs. As
his business grew, he managed the daily cash flow through line of credit from banks. He
always paid his bills on time. He had an excellent credit rating.
In 2005, a real estate broker in his office building raised the possibility of
investing in the real estate market. Although he initially declined, Applicant eventually
agreed to buy 22 rental properties. He negotiated terms of the purchase with the real
estate broker, but did not reduce the negotiations to writing as he trusted the real estate
broker. Because he trusted the real estate broker, he did not carefully investigate the
properties involved in this deal. The real estate broker obtained the mortgage financing
and the property appraisals through his friends. Until the closing on the properties,
Applicant did not know that the property he purchased had been titled in the name of
the wife of the real estate broker. When the final closing occurred, the real estate broker
and his wife reneged on a major part of the financing for the properties.
Applicant sought legal counsel on the financing issues with the property. His
attorneys uncovered a well-orchestrated scheme to unload poorly performing rental
property at inflated real estate values. Due diligence would have uncovered the
unrented properties, but not the problems with the appraisal values and improper
mortgage financing. Applicant, however, bears some responsibility for not investigating
the real estate arrangement more aggressively. The perpetrators of this fraudulent
scheme absconded with the profits from the sale of properties with inflated appraisals
and left Applicant with excessive mortgage debt on the low value properties. This
fraudulent scheme seriously impacted Applicant’s  business and personal finances. The
banks withdrew the lines of credit he used to operated his business, forcing him to work
strictly on a cash flow basis. His personal income from the business also declined
sharply since he changed how his business operates. He has paid his personal debts in
a timely manner.
Under state law, the mortgage lenders cannot seek reimbursement of any
financial losses from the foreclosure procedures instituted when Applicant defaulted on
the loan payments. He owes nothing on the these loans, which comprise 90% of the
debts listed in the SOR. Except for his unintentional involvement in this fraudulent
scheme, Applicant always maintained excellent finances. He always paid his bills on
time. He is a successful businessman who has provided needed services to the
government. In the field of communications, his speciality, he has developed business
and professional expertise. He ventured into the real estate investment market with little
real estate knowledge and experience. He failed in his real estate enterprise. There is
little likelihood he will venture into other areas of investment without learning as much
as he can about the market. Applicant has learned a hard lesson about investment
ventures.
 Applicant relied on his attorneys’ representations about his personal liability for
the unpaid mortgage debt. In doing so, he answered the financial questions on the
security based on his explanation for the foreclosures. Applicant is working to resolve
12
the remaining credit card debts, which are business credit cards. His company normally
pays these bills  His attorney does not consider him a credit risk and is not demanding
immediate repayment of his $20,000 in attorney fees. His business income is sufficient
to pay these debts and there is little likelihood he will not pay these debts, given his past
payment records. These debts, as well as his attorney fee debt, cannot be a source of
improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are
paidBit is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a
security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise
security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.bb: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
