                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16891 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations due to periods 
of unemployment and underemployment. Her evidence is insufficient to show that she is 
in control of her finances, is not overextended, and has a track record of financial 
responsibility. She failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions or Standard Form (SF) 85P.1 On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her,2 pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
1  GE 1.  
 
2  GE 1 is the source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on June 10, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 17, 2008. The hearing was convened as scheduled 
on July 7, 2008. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection (Tr. 19). Applicant testified on her own behalf, and 
presented no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 15, 
2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c – 1.e, and 1.g – 1.l, with explanations. She 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f. In her answer to the SOR, she failed to admit or deny SOR 
¶¶ 1.m – 1.p. At her hearing, she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.m – 1.p were her or her children’s 
medical debts (Tr. 42). Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old security associate working for a Government 
contractor. She has never been married. She has three children, ages 15, 11, and 2. 
After completing high school in 1992, she had her first son. From 1993 to 1997, she 
worked full time for numerous employers in positions such as receptionist, cashier, and 
waitress (Tr. 45). She also worked for a temporary work agency. In 1997, she had her 
daughter and had to stop working for approximately one year. From 1998 to 2001, she 
resumed working full time in similar job positions (Tr. 48). From 2001 to 2006, Applicant 
ran her own child care provider business from her home (Tr. 48-49). In 2006, she was 
pregnant with her baby, and had difficulty running the child care business. 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was hired as a part-time security associate by a 
Government contractor and received interim access to classified information (Tr. 15). 
She worked 20 hours a week and was paid approximately $12.50 an hour. Because of 
her good performance, she was offered a full-time security associate position. She 
 
3  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
3 
 
worked full-time for approximately six months before her interim access was withdrawn 
because of the concerns alleged in the SOR (Tr. 21-22). She needs access to classified 
information to do her job. Applicant was forced to go back to a part-time work schedule 
for some time. As of her hearing date, she was unemployed (Tr. 60). She explained she 
is having trouble finding a job that would pay enough for her to pay a babysitter and with 
a convenient schedule for her to take care of her children.  
 
There is no evidence to show that she has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. Nor is there evidence showing that she has ever 
failed to follow the rules and procedures required to handle classified information. She 
has no police record, and there is no evidence she has used or trafficked in illegal 
drugs. 
 
Applicant has custody of her three children. Her 15-year-old son receives $325 in 
support from his father (Tr. 25, 50). Her 11-year-old daughter receives no support from 
her father. The father of her two-year-old son works as a bus driver and provides some 
financial support to the household. Applicant’s mother is disabled; however, she does 
not live with and is not financially dependent on Applicant (Tr. 63). Applicant has 
received state assistance in the form of subsidized housing since 2002. Her rent is 
limited to 30% of her income (Tr. 51). She is currently receiving unemployment benefits.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her SF 86, her responses to DOHA interrogatories (GE 2), and 
three credit bureau reports (CBRs) one from 2007 (GE 5 ), and two from 2008 (GE 3 & 
4). The SOR alleges 16 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately $8,740.  
 
Applicant admitted that most of the debts alleged in SOR are her debts and have 
been delinquent for a long period of time. She denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
($95) claiming she paid and/or entered into a new service agreement with the creditor 
(Tr. 34, 52). She denied SOR ¶ 1.f ($55) and claimed in her answer to the SOR that she 
recently paid the debt. At her hearing, she contradicted her SOR answer and claimed 
she talked to the creditor after receipt of her SOR and the creditor had agreed to “take 
off” the debt from her CBR (Tr. 41, 56). She presented no documentary evidence to 
support her claims.   
 
Applicant explained her financial problems were caused by a combination of 
factors; i.e., she is a single mother of three, and for the most part, the sole provider for 
her children; being underemployed or unemployed; and not having medical insurance 
coverage for her and her children. She noted most of the delinquent debts resulted from 
medical services she could not afford (Tr. 21-22). 
 
Applicant explained that although her delinquent debts are relatively small, she 
never made any effort to contact her creditors and did not pay any of her debts because 
 
 
4 
 
she could not afford to pay for her day-to-day living expenses and her past financial 
obligations (Tr. 68).  
 
Applicant claimed she started trying to correct her financial situation when she 
was hired full-time. She testified she made payment arrangement and/or settlement 
agreements with some of her creditors (Tr. 29). She was waiting to receive her 2007 
income tax refund to pay some of her debts, but since she was laid off in March 2008, 
she decided to use the money to support her children. She presented no documentary 
evidence to support her claims. 
 
From November 2007 to March 2008, Applicant was earning approximately 
$1,900 a month (Tr. 31). She receives $325 for child support for her oldest son. Her 
monthly rent was $550. Her monthly expenses were as follows: utilities $400; food 
$300, and day care $560. In 2002, she bought a new Mazda Protégé which was 
repossessed in 2006. In March 2008, she bought a 2003 GMC Envoy because she 
needed it to get to work, and to take her children to day care. As of the day of the 
hearing, she was two months late on the payments (Tr. 59). She indicated no car 
insurance or car payment in her financial statements.  
 
Applicant has not sought or participated in any financial counseling. She knows 
her debts are small and she believes she can take care of her financial problems on her 
own. She knows she has been financially irresponsible and promised to do better if she 
can get her full time job back (Tr. 43). Applicant expressed remorse for her past 
financial problems. She asserted she is doing the best she can under her 
circumstances. She noted her good job performance and that she is responsible and 
reliable.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
 
5 
 
                                                          
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is well documented in her credit reports, her SOR 
response, and her testimony. Through the years, she acquired numerous debts which 
became delinquent and have remained outstanding. As of the hearing date, she had 16 
outstanding debts totaling approximately $8,740. The government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                                          
Considering the record evidence as a whole,6 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact 
creditors, or to resolve any of the debts since she acquired them. Nor is there any 
evidence that she has participated in any financial counseling.   
 
I specifically considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(b) 
and conclude it applies, but only to a limited extent. Applicant’s testimony established 
factors that may be considered as circumstances beyond her control contributing to her 
inability to pay her debts, i.e., being a single mother and sole provider for her three 
children, the lack of financial assistance from one of her children’s fathers; and her 
periods of unemployment or underemployment.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she has dealt 
responsibly with her financial obligations before, or after receipt of the SOR. Applicant 
has been consistently employed and earned money for extended periods of time. She 
presented little or no evidence to show paid debts, settlements, documented 
negotiations, payment plans, budgets, or financial assistance/counseling. Applicant’s 
financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she has 
established a track record of financial responsibility, or that she has taken control of her 
financial situation. Based on the available evidence, she is overextended financially and 
her financial problems are likely to be a concern in the future. Her financial problems are 
recent, not isolated, and ongoing.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). 
6  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as a whole. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s work for the Government contractor weighs in her favor. She started 
in a part-time position and because of her good performance was selected to a full-time 
position. She had interim access to classified information for almost two years and there 
is no evidence that she compromised classified information. Aside from her delinquent 
debts (which are a civil, non-criminal issue), she is a law-abiding citizen and a 
concerned mother. She expressed regrets for her financial mistakes and claimed she is 
trying to correct them.  
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in her case, including Applicant’s 
age, education, and maturity, she demonstrated a lack of judgment and trustworthiness 
in the handling of her financial affairs. She failed to deal responsibly with her financial 
obligations. Her failure or inability to live within her means and to meet her financial 
obligations indicates poor self-control or an unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Based on the available evidence, she is overextended financially and her 
financial problems are likely to be a concern in the future.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
