                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13821 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 15 past-due or charged-off accounts totaling approximately 
$11,000 and filed for bankruptcy protection in 1998. None of the debts have been paid. 
Applicant has not successfully mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 22, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 In Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR he elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 30, 2008. The FORM contained eight 
attachments. On August 5, 2008, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant's response to the FORM was 
due 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. Applicant’s response was due on 
September 4, 2008. As of September 25, 2008, no response had been received. On 
September 25, 2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the $422 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
and an $818 bank debt (SOR ¶ 1.c). He admitted the $656 school debt (SOR ¶ 1.h) was 
his ex-wife’s debt. In his answer, he stated he had gone to court and he and his ex-wife 
each have to pay half of the medical bills.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old electrician who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 2000, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance.  
 
In November 1998, Applicant sought bankruptcy protection under Chapter 13, 
the wage earner’s plan, of the bankruptcy code. In his Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Position dated September 2006 (Item 1), in response to question 27 on his financial 
record, Applicant reported his November 1998 bankruptcy. The record is silent as to the 
reason for seeking bankruptcy protection, the creditors listed in the Chapter 13, the 
amount of his monthly payments to the bankruptcy trustee, how long the plan lasted, if 
the plan was dismissed, or discharged.  
 
Applicant’s tax return for 2002 was due April 2003. In September 2003, the state 
tax commission issued a tax lien for tax year 2002. In January 2004, a cancellation of 
judgment for the tax lien was issued. (Item 5) The SOR states the tax lien was released 
in January 2004. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant alleges the state tax commission 
issued the lien in error and he has a letter from the state tax commission verifying his 
claim. (Answer to SOR) No letter was submitted. The FORM and Applicant’s SOR 
answer fail to provide any additional information about this tax lien.  
 
The SOR lists 15 debts of concern which total approximately $11,000. The 
largest debt is a car debt ($7,506) listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant asserts he was divorced, the car was granted to his wife, and she “let it go 
back.” No court orders were provided showing any property division.  
 
As of January 2008, Applicant’s gross monthly salary was $3,400. His monthly 
disposable income (gross income less expenses) or remainder was $159. (Item 5) The 
 
 
 
3
financial interrogatory (Item 5) directed Applicant to provide documentation verifying 
payment and current status of the delinquent or outstanding debts listed in his Mary 
2007 credit bureau report (CBR). (Item 7) 
 
Applicant was specifically instructed that acceptable documentation included 
recent statement or vouchers from the creditors, documentation from a credit 
consolidation institution indicating creditors and payment history, loan applications 
made in an effort to satisfy debts, documentation from creditors reflecting payment 
arrangements or payment plans, and/or bankruptcy records reflecting the delinquent 
accounts are included in bankruptcy.  
 
No documentation of any kind was received. Nor was there any documentation 
showing Applicant was disputing the debts. He admitted the debts and stated a court 
had directed he and his wife were to each pay half of the medical bills. A copy of the 
divorce decree or other court order was not provided.  
 
A summary of the SOR debts of concern follows:  
 
SOR 
¶ 1 
Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed 
November 1998. 
Unknown Unknown. 
b State tax lien released January 
2004.  
$422 Released. 
c Bank charge off on credit card.(Item 
7, p.6) 
$818 No documentation 
showing payment for 
items c - q. 
d Credit card charge off on an auto 
loan. (Item 6, p. 3; Item 7, p.6)  
$7,506  
e Medical account placed for 
collection.(Item 7, p. 7) 
$177  
f Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.8)  
$82  
g Collection agency debt placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.9)  
$75  
h School debt placed for collection. 
(Item 7, p.10)  
$656  
i Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.12)  
$67  
 
 
 
4
j Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.12)  
$172  
k Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.12)  
$139  
l Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 6, p. 2; Item 7, p.12) 
$81  
m Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.12)  
$197  
n Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 6, p. 2; Item 7, p.13) 
$210  
o Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 6, p. 2; Item 7, p.13) 
$40  
p Collection agency for account placed 
for collection. (Item 7, p.14)  
$54  
q Medical account placed for 
collection. (Item 7, p.14)  
$101  
 Total debt listed in SOR $10,797  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
 
 
5
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
 
 
 
6
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 In 1998 Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection. He has 15 delinquent or past 
debts due totaling approximately $11,000, which have been placed for collection or 
charged off. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Applicant was informed in the financial interrogatories that he needed to provide 
sufficient documentation to show he had resolved his debts. He was specifically told 
acceptable documentation included: recent statement from the creditors, a credit 
consolidation institution plan, a consolidation loan, documentation reflecting paying on 
repayment plans, and/or bankruptcy records reflecting the delinquent. No 
documentation was received. Applicant has not disputed the debts. He admitted the 
debts and stated a court had directed he pay half of the medical bills. A copy of the 
divorce decree or other court order was not provided.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; [and] 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s 15 debts remain unpaid and are not infrequent. 
There is no showing the debts were occurred under such circumstances that it is 
 
 
 
7
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), ten of the debts totaling $1,266 were for medical debts placed 
for collection. However, there is no showing the nature of the illness, hospitalization, 
insurance coverage, or if the debts were incurred due to an unexpected medical 
emergency. The fact the debts are medical debts does not prove the debts were caused 
by conditions largely beyond Applicant’s control. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(c), there is no showing Applicant has attended financial classes, 
maintains a budget, or is paying his debts. AG & 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(d), the tax lien was cancelled showing Applicant no longer owes 
the debt, a debt he denied in his SOR answer. The reason for the lien, or if it was 
mistakenly issued, has not been established. Applicant admits owing the remaining 
debts in his answer to the SOR, although he infers a portion of the debts are now his 
ex-wife’s debts as decreed in his divorce. Even though a copy of the divorce decree 
was not produced, such divorce decrees are normally binding on Applicant and his ex-
wife, but have no binding effect on a creditor without the creditor’s consent. Routinely, 
such decrees do not relieve either party of liability to the creditor. Should either party fail 
to fulfill the agreement, the creditor could still enforce the debt against the joint maker of 
the debt who could then look for relief from their noncompliant ex-spouse.  
 
No other payments are shown. Evidence of a good-faith effort is lacking. 
Applicant failed to provide documentation supporting payment or repayment 
agreements. AG & 20(d) does not apply. AG & 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not documented any dispute of the debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
8
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
protection in November 1998. Applicant has recently been divorced and has $159 per 
month of discretionary income. The debts remain unpaid. There is no showing of credit 
counseling, or the likelihood the debts will not continue. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
The amount of debt is not large. The awarding of a security clearance is not a 
once in a life time occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances 
a clearance is not warranted, but should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to 
reapply for a security clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, 
he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a 
clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Consideration: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a, 1.c -1.q: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1. b:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
