                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13618
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeffery Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On April 04, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 29, 2008 and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on July 10, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on July 30,
2008.  A hearing was held on July 30, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether it
would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or deny,
Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case
consisted of four exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and
seven exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on August 7, 2008.  Based upon a
2
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR
to add subparagraph 2.e that alleges Applicant omitted to list his domestic pled
misdemeanor corporal injury offense when answering subparagraph 23.f of his e-QIs in
October 2006, and December 2006.  For good cause shown, Department Counsel’s
motion was granted.  Applicant denied the amended incorporated allegation.   
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested in October1996
and charged with inflict corporal injury on spouse (a felony offense), (2) terrorist threats
(a felony offense), and obstruct justice (a felony offense), to which he pled guilty to a
lesser charge of spousal abuse and was sentenced to 18 months of probation and
ordered to complete an anger management course, which he had not completed as of
January 2008.  
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (I) falsified the security clearance
application (e-QIP) he completed in October 2006 by failing to disclose his earlier felony
arrest/charges in October 2006 arrest in multiple places on the form, (ii) reiterated his
arrest/charges when completing an updated e-QIP in December 2006, and (iii) failed to
disclose his 2006 arrest/charges until confronted by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) in March 2007.  
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted his criminal charges but denied
falsifying his security clearance applications and misleading the OPM interviewer who
cam to interview Applicant in March 2007. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old-computer integration specialist for a defense contractor
who seeks to retain his security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant is married (for 24 years) and has no children.  He served in the Air
Force for 20 years (spanning March 1984 and March 2004) and has many earned
service medals that commemorate his military service.  He filled out security clearance
applications in the Air Force, and has held a clearance while in the Air Force (R.T., at
71-74), and has held a clearance for most of his tenure with his current defense
contractor, commencing in 1978 (R.T., at 83-84, 89-90).  
3
Applicant and his wife (W) engaged in a domestic quarrel in October 2006 after
he told W’s sister that he was contemplating a divorce (see ex. 3; R.T., at 62).  W
learned of the disclosure and exploded with anger (R.T., at 62).  When she returned
home, she confronted Applicant.  An argument ensued, and W slammed the door
(putting a hole in the wall).  She then hurled closed fists at Applicant, which he was able
to block (ex. 3).  Applicant, in turn, pushed W onto the couch to try and calm her down.
When W first tried to call the police, Applicant knocked the phone out of her hand,
breaking the phone (ex. 3).  W then picked up another phone and called the police
(R.T., at 63-64).  When police responded to the call, they arrested Applicant, placed him
in custody, and charged him with domestic assault (see ex. 3).
The police charged Applicant with felony domestic assault on the date of his
arrest in October 2996 (R.T., at 64, 94-98, 101-02). In his first court appearance in
November 2006, the court explained the newly amended  misdemeanor charges filed
on October 30, 2006 to him, and afforded him the opportunity to obtain an attorney
(R.T., at 65, 85).  The State’s amended charge (see ex. G) replaced the felony assault
charge with a reduced charge of corporal injury to spouse/co-habitant/child’s parent (a
misdemeanor offense). 
 When Applicant appeared in court for his second court appearance, he pleaded
guilty to the amended lesser spousal abuse charge and was sentenced to 18 months of
unsupervised probation and ordered to complete an anger management course by May
2008 (R.T., at 66-67).  He was told that if he provided proof of completing the
conditioned anger management course, the misdemeanor charge would be dropped
(R.T., at 66-67, 85-86). The court also issued a restraining order on Applicant, which W
subsequently had revoked. 
 By January 2008, Applicant had still not signed up for the course.  He
documents completing the course, however, in April 2008 and fulfilling his probation
requirements (see ex. F; R.T., at 68-69).  Appellant claims the misdemeanor charges
have been dismissed, but provides no documented proof.
Applicant and W continue to live together for the benefit of their child who needs
Applicant’s medical insurance (see ex. 3).  While neither Applicant nor W have filed for
divorce, both contemplate legal separation based on incompatibility (ex. 3).  
Applicant was asked to complete an e-QIP in early October 2006 (before his
2006 offense).  Before he could electronically complete and return the form, the incident
with his wife occurred. Bt the time he certified the e-QIP and returned it to his command
for processing, the intervening incident with W had transpired (R.T., at 78).  However,
Applicant did not go back and list his omitted initial felony domestic assault charges
(which had not yet been amended), when answering sub-sections a and c of question
23 (see ex. 2; R.T., at 78-82).  He also omitted his same charges when answering
question 23.e (ex. 2) of the same e-QIP.  Applicant claimed he had completed his
October 2006 e-QIP before learning that any actual charges had been filed or lodged
against him (R.T., at 60).  He assures he did not purposely omit his October 2006
4
domestic incident, and advised his supervisor of the 2006 arrest while filling out the
initial e-QIP form on his computer (R.T., at 59).  He attributes his omissions to haste
and his claimed belief that the charges would be dismissed and would not be material
thereafter (R.T., at 59-60). Police and court records reveal that police filed felony
charges against him in connection with his arrest and initially pressed those charges.
Applicant was unable to convincingly show otherwise.
In December 2006, Applicant’s FSO asked him to complete an updated SF-86.
In this updated application, Applicant repeated, without reviewing his answers, the same
omissions he made about his domestic arrest/charges in his earlier e-QIP.(see ex. 2;
R.T., at 86-87).  He had no explanation, though, for his omission of the amended
misdemeanor charges in this updated application.  When considered together with his
earlier omissions, his explanations have no credible thread of mistaken assumptions or
consistency.   
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding his domestic arrest and
charges associated with his earlier October 2006 domestic violence arrest, the
amendments, and Applicant’s ensuing guilty plea, his explanations cannot be reconciled
with the time-line of events that culminated with his guilty plea to the amended charges. 
Inferences warrant that his omissions were intentional and knowing under all the
circumstances known at the time, and calculated to conceal his arrest and charges from
OPM investigators reviewing his submitted e-QIPs.  Not until confronted about his
October 2006 arrest/charges in a March 2007 interview with an OPM investigator did
Applicant disclose his same arrest/charges and disposition of the same (see exs. 2 and
3; R.T., at 89-90).  
Applicant’s site manager confirms he was kept informed of Applicant’s October
2006 domestic incident through Applicant’s chain of command (R.T., at 106-08).
However, he indicated limited familiarity with the domestic charges brought against
Applicant in October 2006 (R.T., at 111).  Applicant told his FSO of the incident with W
and his decision not to list any charges stemming from the incident based on his belief
the charges would be dropped  (R.T., at 105, 111).  The FSO, in turn, relayed the
information to his maintenance supervisor, who told the site manager (R.T., at 106-11).  
Applicant’s site manager credits Applicant with strong work performance (see ex.
E).  He finds Applicant to be honest and forthcoming about problems that might impact
his work.  Applicant’s coworkers characterize applicant as well mannered technician
who enjoys a good working relationship with the other members of his team (ex. E).
Applicant’s flight maintenance supervisor extols his technical and trainer skills, and
described him as the “go to” technician for fixing tough problems and ensuring
completion of his squadron’s mission (see ex. E).
 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
5
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
6
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious computer integration specialist who was involved in a
single domestic violence arrest and charge but twice omitted the offense in his security
clearance applications before being confronted by an OPM investigator in a follow-up
interview.  Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s arrest and omissions.
Criminal conduct offense
Applicant’s single domestic violence arrest warrants initial consideration of  two
disqualifying conditions of AG ¶ 18.  DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless
of whether the person was formally charged,” has application.  Applicant’s lone domestic
violence arrest was reduced to a misdemeanor charge to which Applicant guilty to
spousal abuse. Applicant was, in turn, was sentenced t o18 months of probation and
ordered to complete a management course (which he did).  With the aid of the lessons
he acquired in his anger management course, Applicant and W have been able to
maintain their marriage and continue living together for the benefit of their young child.
Most important, by his completing the anger management course, Applicant has been
able to obtain the dismissal of the original misdemeanor charge.
Applicant may rely on MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal
behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” in mitigation of his spousal abuse conviction.  This arrest/charge and
conviction by itself is insufficient to warrant continuing security concerns about his
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  His FSO, site manager, and coworkers hold
him in high esteem and value his team work and professionalism.  These collective
impressions of Applicant coupled with the demonstrated responsibility he has shown in
maintaining his marriage in the face of the 2006 offense speak positively to Applicant’s
family commitments and fiducial responsibilities. 
Based on a consideration of the applicable guidelines and a whole person
assessment, Applicant mitigates the criminal conduct specifically associated with his
spousal abuse incident.  Taking  into account all of the facts and circumstances
7
developed in the record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraph 1.a of the SOR.
Falsification issues
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s multiple omissions of the domestic violence arrest and charges arising out of
this incident in the security clearance application forms he completed in October 2006,
and again in December 2006., and in his withholding of his arrest/charges until he was
confronted in an ensuing OPM interview.  So much trust is imposed on persons cleared
to see classified information that deviation tolerances for candor lapses are gauged very
narrowly. 
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with,  since he failed to promptly correct his
initial e-QIP omission in the follow-up e-QIP he was asked to complete, and before being
confronted in his ensuing OPM interview.  In the past, the Appeal Board has denied
applicants availability of the predecessor mitigating condition of MC ¶ 27(a) (the
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts) where the applicant has waited many
months to timely correct a known omission. Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (Appeal
Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (Appeal Bd. January 1995).  
By willfully and knowingly failing to disclose his October 2006 arrest and charges
in two e-QIP applications, Applicant concealed materially important background
information needed for the government to properly process and evaluate his security
updates.  His attributed reasons for his omitting his arrest/charges (belief that the
charges would be dismissed) are not sustainable grounds for averting inferences of
falsification.  Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his multiple e-QIP
arrest/charge omissions and lack of any prompt, good faith corrections, Applicant’s
claims lack the necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he
knowingly and deliberately withheld material background information about his prior
arrest/charges.
Knowing and wilful falsification is also covered by the criminal conduct guidelines. 
Mitigation of the criminal features of his omissions falls along a little bit different fault line
than is the case with personal conduct considerations.  Here, Applicant’s positive work
record and demonstrated family commitments play a major role in mitigating criminal
conduct coverage of his omissions.  MC ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement,” has application.
Employment of this guideline and the use of separate whole-person weighing of
Applicant’s actions and contributions to the military, his professional achievements, and
his community support enable him to mitigate the criminal conduct coverage of his e-QIP
omissions.
8
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2.2 factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e of Guideline E. Favorable
conclusions warrant, however, with respect to subparagraph 1.b of Guideline J.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2 2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                   AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.a:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.b:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.c:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.d:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.e:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
9
                                        
  
