 
 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-12013 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Criminal Conduct. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on October 4, 2005. On March 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 31, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received her response on April 2, 2008. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 11, 2008, and I received the 
 
 2
                                                          
case assignment on April 22, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 2008, 
scheduling the hearing for June 4, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were received without objection, and she testified on her own behalf. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations as alleged. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
   
Applicant is a 42-year-old “team lead”1, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since April 2004. GE 1, Tr. 32-33. She is a first time applicant for a security 
clearance and stated she believes obtaining a security clearance is a condition of 
employment. Tr. 33-34. 
 
Applicant graduated form high school in May 1984. Tr. 31. Applicant married in 
August 2001. She has three of her own children, a 22-year-old son, a 19-year-old 
daughter, and an 18-year-old daughter. She has three stepchildren, a 25-year-old 
stepson, a 15-year-old stepdaughter, and a 14-year-old stepdaughter. Her 19 and 18 
year old daughters live with her and her husband. Tr. 30. 
 
The SOR alleges seven separate line items under Criminal Conduct spanning a 
16-year period from 1991 to 2007. They are discussed infra beginning with the most 
recent incident. 
 
In January 2007, Applicant was charged with felony 2nd degree assault. In July 
2007, the charge was nolle prossed. (SOR ¶ 1a.) GE 3, GE 4, Tr. 12-15. Applicant 
explained, “Some girl came to my house to fight my daughter. Then she said I hit her.” 
GE 2. In July 2005, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct and failure to obey a 
reasonable/lawful order. In October 2005, the charges were merged and Applicant was 
convicted of failure to obey a reasonable/lawful order. She was sentenced to serve 
three days in jail and pay court costs. (¶ 1.b.) Applicant was involved in a confrontation 
with a group of juveniles who were attempting to fight with her daughter. Applicant 
disputes the fact she used profanity or spoke in a loud voice after being ordered not to 
do so by a police officer. GE 5, GE 6, Tr. 17-20. 
 
In June 1995, Applicant was charged with being disorderly in a public place and 
battery. In August 1995, these two charges were place on the stet docket. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
GE 7. Applicant testified she does not recall that incident. Tr. 20. In March 1994, 
Applicant was charged with assault and malicious destruction of property. In June 1994, 
the assault charged was nolle prossed and she was convicted of malicious destruction 
1 Applicant described her job as “I am the team lead for the other administrative assistants.” Tr. 
32. 
 
 3
of property. She was sentenced to 60 days in jail of which 30 days was suspended, and 
placed on two years probation. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) GE 8. Applicant testified, “Me and this girl 
was friends, and me and her got in a fuss, and I pushed her car door and dented her 
car.” Applicant explained the underlying basis of the dispute, “Oh, it was about another 
friend – she was messing with the friend’s boyfriend and I didn’t like it.” Tr. 21-21. 
 
In December 1993, Applicant was charged with assault, harass – a course of 
conduct, telephone call repeat/abuse, and trespass private property. In June 1994, the 
assault, harass – a course of conduct, and trespass private property charges were nolle 
prossed, and she was convicted of telephone call repeat/abuse. She was sentenced to 
six months in jail of which five months was suspended, ordered to pay costs, and placed 
on two years probation. (SOR ¶ 1.e.) GE 9, Tr. 22-24. Applicant testified, “Me and this 
girl was friends, and her and my cousin had started dating the same boy, and I think I 
called her up on the phone, and me and her got a fussing about it, and she had me 
arrested for all of this. Because I kept calling her.” Tr. 22. 
 
In September 1993, Applicant was charged with battery, and in January 1994, 
she was convicted of this charge. She was sentenced to 60 days in jail, which was 
suspended, ordered to pay costs, and was placed on one year of probation. (SOR ¶ 
1.f.) GE 10. Applicant testified she was at a club and a woman, “said I pushed her – I 
pushed and I hit her or something. And we went to court and she had witnesses to say 
that I pushed her or hit her.” When asked whether she did in fact push or hit her, 
Applicant answered, “Probably, yes.” Tr. 25-26. 
 
In April 1991, Applicant was charged with obstructing and hindering, and in 
August 1991, she was convicted of this charge. She was fined $235, which was 
suspended, and was placed on one year of probation. (SOR ¶ 1.g.) GE 11. Applicant 
explained, “My brother stole my car and he went to the store and stole something, and 
the police towed my car away, and I was out there fussing and arguing with them.” Tr. 
26-27. 
 
Applicant denied being arrested or charged with any offense since January 2007. 
In response to being asked what she would do if she found herself in another 
altercation, she said, “I don’t find myself – I mean, I had to learn from my mistakes and 
how it could cost me my career, so I don’t sit and argue – just like I said back in 2007, 
2005 – back in 1995, back them years, I never really had to have responsibility, 
because my mother was living and she helped me take care of my kids.”  
 
 Applicant stated she sought counseling with her pastor regarding her anger 
issues in 2006. Tr. 36, 38. Applicant submitted three work-related character references 
all offering positive comments. AE A – AE C. She also submitted two recent employee 
performance reviews reflecting above average performance. AE D, AE E.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
 4
                                                          
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
2 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
3 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
 5
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The Government established its case under Guideline J by Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that Applicant was involved in seven separate 
criminal offenses spanning a 16-year period from 1993 to 2007. 
 
Of the six Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG  ¶ 31, two 
are applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Of the five Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions listed under AG ¶ 32, two are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
 
 6
                                                          
 Applicant’s recent arrest, which occurred after she submitted her e-QIP, brings to 
the forefront the criminal conduct concerns raised by her past behavior. I am required to 
consider Applicant’s overall questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of 
the conduct alleged in the SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which her 
behavior is recent; the likelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s explanations concerning the 
circumstances of the incidents alleged; and her rehabilitation.4 
 
 Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s criminal behavior is 
recent and not isolated. Considering her past criminal behavior, the nature and 
seriousness of her misconduct, and her unwillingness to avoid unlawful conduct, I find 
her favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate Guideline J security concerns. Her 
behavior raises questions about her ability and willingness to follow the law, and 
ultimately, to protect classified information. Her conduct spanning a 16-year period 
requiring repeated law enforcement intervention weighs against a finding of 
rehabilitation and positive behavioral changes. I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she 
is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 7
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
