1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12525
SSN:--------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline E (Personal
Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on December 20,
2006. On March 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 5, 2008. He admitted all eight
allegations in the SOR with explanation and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 4, 2008,
and I received the case assignment on June 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing
on June 20, 2008, for a hearing on July 22, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government submitted four exhibits (Exh.) which were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted eight exhibits which were
admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript
of the hearing (Tr.) on July 30, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Procedural Rulings
Amendments to SOR
The government moved before the hearing to amend the SOR to change the
month in the date in SOR ¶ 1.h., and to add two additional allegations relating to
falsification of material facts on his SF 86 (SOR ¶ 1.i.), and in statements to an
investigator (SOR ¶ 1.j.). Applicant filed an answer to the Amended SOR. He agreed to
the date correction and admitted the two additional allegations. The amendments were
adopted without objection. 
    Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the ten allegations under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) in the SOR relating to arrests, traffic, omissions and
other personal conduct issues.
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a major government contractor working
for the past 18 months as support staff for information technology for the Department of
Homeland Security. 
Applicant served in the Navy between 1996 and 2004 when he was medically
separated. The allegations in the SOR occurred over a 23 year period beginning with
receiving a ticket for driving without a license in his home town when he was 17-years-
old (SOR ¶ 1.a.). 
The next allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., and 1.c.) relate to activity while Applicant was
on active duty in 1996-1997. During that period his wife shoplifted several times, both
alone and with him, in private stores and with him at a Post Exchange where they were
arrested in August 1997. He was given non-judicial punishment under Article 81
(conspiracy to shoplift) of the UCMJ. His punishment included a pay forfeiture, a
suspended reduction in paygrade, and 45 days of restriction and extra duty. His access
to SCI was temporarily suspended but restored a month later at the request of his
command. After filing for divorce in 2001, Applicant and his wife were divorced by a
decree dated January 11, 2002. He has never re-married. 
3
In August 2001, while stationed in Puerto Rico, Applicant was riding a motorcycle
and had a head on collision with an automobile that ran in front of him. He suffered
multiple fractures, was hospitalized, and unable to work for a year of recovery (Exh. H).
After his recovery in the summer of 2002 he joined a motorcycle club and participated in
thrill riding such as driving in excess of 100 mph fleeing the police and eluding lawful
stops. On one occasion he was stopped by police while driving without a license (SOR
¶¶ 1.d., and 1.e.).
In November, 2003, around Thanksgiving, Applicant was stopped by a police
officer for speeding. During the police inquiry he provided false information to the officer
by identifying himself with a false name since he knew he had a suspended license
(SOR ¶ 1.f.). 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application in 2005 on which he denied
at Question 32, relating to denial or suspension of a security clearance, that his security
clearance had ever been suspended whereas it had been in 1997 as noted above (SOR
¶ 1.g.). On January 18, 2006, the National Security Agency denied access to NSA SCI
for Applicant based on all of the above cited allegations (SOR ¶ 1.h.). Subsequently,
Applicant filed the SF 86 at issue in this proceeding and denied that access had ever
been denied him at Question 26. On that application he did answer correctly concerning
the 1997 suspension (SOR ¶ 1.i.). 
In the course of the investigation for this matter, Applicant was interviewed on
July 12, 2007, by an investigator and denied knowledge of his former wife’s intent to
shoplift during the 1996-1997 incidents for which he received non-judicial punishment
for conspiracy to shoplift (SOR ¶ 1.j.).
Applicant is well regarded for his honesty and trustworthiness by several friends
and co-workers (Exhs. A-D). He is a successful contributor in his work and is regarded
as a good collaborator and hard worker by his rater for the 2007 calendar year (Exh. E).
Applicant’s mother submitted a lengthy letter regarding his background and some of the
difficulties he and his family have had over the years (Exh. F). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG &
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all available,
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b)
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
5
The following disqualifying conditions (DC) in the guideline will normally
result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative termination of
further processing for clearance eligibility:
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and,
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations. 
       Based on the evidence in the record, Applicant failed to provide full and frank
answers to certain critical questions on two SF 86s as noted in the first two DC’s noted
above. His other conduct involving speeding, giving false information to the police, other
6
driving offenses, and conspiracy to shoplift were insufficient to establish a basis for
allegations under other guidelines, but do indicate a whole person assessment of
questionable judgment, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. .All of
these factors established a sufficient basis for a security concern under Guideline E.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully.
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and,
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
While most of the mitigating conditions are not applicable; several could be such
as the passage of so much time since the earliest offenses and the fact that he no
longer is married to his former wife who appears to have initiated the shoplifting.
However, he too, was deemed culpable yet continues to equivocate regarding his
responsibility. Security concerns pertaining to personal conduct are not mitigated.  
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant=s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual=s age and maturity
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary;
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant has been involved in a variety of rule-breaking and rule-bending
actionsfor many years. Some could be mitigated as in the distant past but even some of
those continue to complicate his life as he seems to want to change the story as to how
they occurred. He has not made wise choices as particularly illustrated by his
motorcycle racing only one year after a near fatal accident. His actions with regard to
his SF 86's in 2005 and 2006 show a cavalier attitude about carefulness in reporting
problems he has had in his life. That is not to say that he is a security risk or likely to
compromise classified information, but those actions are sufficiently recent as to
convince me that it is premature to grant him a clearance at this time. 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from these personal
conduct allegations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is denied.
_____________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD
Administrative Judge
