                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13393 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Francisco Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United States since 1998. His nationality is Uyghur.1 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents of the PRC in the Xinjiang 
Uyghur Autonomous Region. He has substantially more connections to the United 
States than to the PRC. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Applicant was a resident of an area located in central Asia historically called Uyghurstan or East 
Turkistan. He is not ethnic Chinese, but Uyghur, also spelled Uighur.  In 1949, the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC) annexed the Uyghur people’s homeland in Western China and renamed the area the 
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR).   
 
 
 
2
                                                          
and DoD Directive,2 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 29, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under Foreign Influence. 
 
 On May 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
June 10, 2008, I was assigned the case. On June 26, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on August 7, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 9, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through H, which were admitted into evidence. On 
August 19, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the PRC. The request and the attached documents were 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (Ex) I─VI. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations of SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, with explanations.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old linguist who has been employed by a defense 
contractor working with a U.S. Army Joint Task Force (JTF) since August 2002. He is 
seeking to maintain a secret security clearance granted in April 2004. (Ex. 2) Applicant’s 
immediate supervisor places him in the top three per cent of the 90 plus linguists he 
supervises. (Tr. 26) Applicant is one of the busiest translators at the JTF. (Tr. 25, 28) 
The site manager states Applicant is a very dedicated, hard working individual. Neither 
his supervisor nor the site manager have ever had a problem with Applicant or had a 
complaint about Applicant. (Tr. 30, 31) 
 
Applicant has received seven certificates of appreciation and a letter of 
recommendation for his work with the JTF. (Exs. A, F) Applicant’s work has been 
beyond reproach. He handles pressure, physical hardships, and emotional stress 
admirably. (Ex. F) His unique skills have made significant contributions to the JTF’s 
mission. (Ex. G) A co-linguist and senior site representative says Applicant is very proud 
of his citizenship and very proud of his contribution to the mission. (Tr. 36) 
 
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
Applicant has endured difficult working conditions to get the mission 
accomplished. He has shown “the true meaning of dedication and personal courage on 
a daily basis.” (Ex. B) Applicant has not only provided meticulous insight into the 
language, but more critically of the social, economic, and religious culture of his native 
people. (Exs. C, G) He is an innovative, self–starter, exceeds expectations, handles 
pressure well, volunteers for overtime to meet deadlines and completes all tasks 
assigned. (Exs. C, G) He is a model citizen who understands and respects the benefits 
of the U.S. (Ex. D) He is dedicated, reliable, and an invaluable asset to the mission. (Tr. 
67)  
 
 In 1972, Applicant was born in the PRC. At age 14, Applicant went to art college. 
In 1989, he graduated from college at the time as the Tiananmen Square student 
uprising. The uprising opened his mind to expressing his rights and feelings against the 
Chinese government. (Tr. 40) In January 1991, Applicant was selected to be an 
entertainer as part of a cultural entertainment dance ensemble at a theme park, in 
China. (Tr. 40) Applicant was a folk dancer. This theme park was 3,000 miles from his 
home. (Tr. 53) In October 1994, Applicant came to the U.S. to work at a Chinese theme 
park sponsored by the Chinese government. He worked at the park until 1995, when an 
acquaintance told Applicant not to return home, because someone Applicant knew and 
talked with had been arrested and placed in jail. (Tr. 41) Applicant sought and received 
political asylum. (Ex. 3) In 1997, Applicant attended a U.S. university.  
 
In July 2003, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Ex. 1) Since coming 
to the U.S. he has had no foreign travel except for travel with his job with the JTF. He 
has no foreign passport. (Ex. 8) In 2001, Applicant was married to a native born U.S. 
citizen and they have one child, a son born in February 2002. In 2005, he was divorced. 
Applicant calls his son daily. (Tr. 57) His job requires him to be gone for three or four 
months before returning home for five or six days. (Tr. 56)  
 
Applicant’s parents, five brothers, and sister live in the PRC. His parents are 
retired medical doctors who operate a drug store. (Tr. 54) One of his brothers is in the 
clothing business, another is a cook, one is a nurse, and the last is a pharmacist. His 
sister is a student. (Tr. 57, Ex. 6) Applicant has a cousin who was adopted by his 
parents and helps them in their home. (Tr. 59) None of his relatives work for a foreign 
government nor have any served in a foreign military.  
 
Applicant talks with his parents every three or four months, asking about their 
health and daily lives. (Tr. 16, Exs. 4, 6) He last talked with them six months ago. He 
last talked to one brother two or three years ago and another brother three or four years 
ago. He has not spoken to his three other brothers since 1994. He last spoke to his 
sister three years ago. His sister was one year old when he last saw her. (Ex. 8) In 
2005, Applicant sent his younger brother money to help with this brother’s tuition. (Tr. 
50) He recently sent his mother money because she was having heart surgery. (Tr. 50) 
 
Applicant assumes all telephone calls from the Xinjiang Uyghur region to foreign 
persons will be monitored by the Chinese government. (Tr. 44, Ex. 7) His family is 
 
 
 
4
iwan. 
                                                          
unaware of what he does. Applicant believes the Chinese authorities claim of Uyghur 
terrorism is simply an excuse to further suppress the Uyghur people. (Tr. 64)  
 
Twice since he has been in the U.S., Chinese authorities have asked his parents 
about him. When his parents were asked when Applicant was coming home and what 
he was doing in the U.S. (Ex. 7) Applicant’s father said Applicant was studying in 
college and he had no control over Applicant or when he would return. (Tr. 45) Applicant 
believes the questioning occurred in 1996 or 1997 and knows it occurred before 2000. 
(Tr. 75)  
 
Should pressure be brought against his foreign relatives, Applicant would notify 
the U.S. government and the F.B.I. He understands that people sometimes are required 
to make sacrifices for a good cause. (Tr. 18) He is only one person and understands he 
must never negotiate or talk with the Chinese government. His main concern is for the 
U.S. and his family in the U.S. (Tr. 18)  
 
Applicant has $25,000 in savings, $40,000 in his 401(k) retirement plan, and 
$85,000 in stock market investments, all located in the U.S. (Ex. 6) He has no foreign 
investment. Applicant describes his naturalization as the best and happiest day of his 
life. (Tr. 60) He will never return to the land of his birth until the Chinese government 
becomes democratic. (Tr. 17) He has no sympathy for the Chinese government or the 
Chinese communist party. (Tr. 42) Applicant states he is a loyal, patriotic citizen who 
would die for American interests, the American people, and his son. (Tr. 65) 
 
China 
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people. It has an authoritarian government dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party.3 China possesses large and increasingly sophisticated military forces, which 
include strategic nuclear weapons and missiles.4 Since the cold war, the U.S. and 
China have been rivals with particular disagreement on the status of Ta
 
The U.S. is a primary intelligence target of China because of the U.S. role as a 
global superpower.5 China operates an aggressive clandestine effort to acquire 
technology. China’s espionage and industrial theft activities are the leading threat and 
single greatest risk to the security of U.S. technology.6 
 
3 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated April 2008 (Background Note on 
China) at 1.2. (Ex. 1) 
 
4 Background Note on China at 16-17. (Ex. 1) 
 
5 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook (Unclassified/For Official Use 
Only) (Intelligence Threat Handbook), dated June 2004 at 17. (Ex. 2) 
 
6 U.S.─ China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2007 Report to Congress of the 
U.S.─ Chine Economic and Security Review Commission, dated November 2007, at 104. (Ex. 3)  
 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
China has a poor record with respect to human rights, it suppresses political 
dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, 
torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.7 In June 2006, Chinese authorities detained and 
beat the sons of a prominent Uyghur human rights activist.8 Chinese authorities monitor 
telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet 
communications. Chinese authorities open and censor domestic and international mail.9 
 
 The largest ethnic group in China is the Han Chinese, which constitutes about 92 
per cent of the total population.10 Han control of the XUAR’s political and economic 
institutions also contributed to heightened tension. Government policies has brought 
economic improvements to the XUAR with Han residents received a disproportionate 
share of the benefits.11  
 
 Since 2001, authorities have increased repression in the Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region (XUAR), targeting in particular the region’s ethnic Uyghur 
population. The government continues to repress Uyghurs expressing peaceful political 
dissent and independent religious views.12 The XUAR government tightened measures 
that diluted expression of Uyghur identity, including measures to reduce education in 
ethnic minority languages and to institute language requirements that disadvantage 
ethnic minority teachers.13 The Chinese government promotes Han migration into the 
XUAR.  
 
 The Uyghurs were one of the largest Turkic peoples living in Central Asia. In 
1949, East Turkestan was annexed by the PRC. (Tr. 39) The name Xinjiang, which 
means “new territory” in Chinese, is an offensive term to many Uyghur people. The 
Chinese government often refers to Uyghur nationalists as “terrorists.”  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
7  Background Note on China (Ex. I) at 9. See U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices ─ 2007, China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau) dated March 11, 2008 at 
1-6. (Country Report) (Ex. V) 
 
8 Country Report at 2. (Ex. V)  
 
9 Id. at 9.(Ex. V) 
 
10 Background Notes at 2. (Ex I) 
 
11 Country Report at 31. (Ex. V) 
 
12 Id. at 31. (Ex. V) (Tr. 83)  
 
13 Country Report 1, 30-31. (Ex. V) 
 
 
 
 
6
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
 
 
 
7
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual=s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation;   
 
(f) failure to report, when required, association with foreign national; 
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nations from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
 
 
8
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country.  
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 AG && 7(a) and 7 (b) applies because his parents and siblings live and are 
residents of the XGAR, a part of the PRC. In every case where a sibling lives overseas, 
there is a risk of pressure on this relative and through them upon the holder of a security 
clearance. Under the facts of this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation pressure, or coercion is substantiated. This potential pressure also raises 
a possible conflict of interest. However, Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and his 
only tie to the PRC is his relatives. 
 
Applicant’s work as a linguist and interpreter supports the U.S. military mission. 
The Army holds his work in high regard. He provided more than language interpretation 
skills. He explained local cultural nuances and practices which greatly assisted the 
military in accomplishing its mission. He has worked very hard to helping the Army and 
has developed a high level of trust with the Army. For the past six years, Applicant has 
 
 
 
9
done excellent work with the U.S. Army Joint Task Force. There have been no 
complaints or actions taken against him. His duty performance is outstanding. 
 Applicant’s contact with his parents is limited to every four to six months. He has 
not had any contact with three siblings since 1994 and very limited contact with two 
brothers and a sister. Even though his contact with his parents is minimal, due to the 
parent son relationship it can not be said the relationship is casual. 
 AG && 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply because “it is unlikely [he] will be place in a 
position of having to choose between the interest of [his parents and siblings] and the 
interest of the U.S.” His infrequent or non existent contacts and not particularly close 
relationship with his siblings have a very low potential for forcing him to choose between 
the United States and the PRC. Applicant has no love for the Chinese government or 
the Chinese Communist party. The Chinese government is taking systematic steps to 
suppress the Uyghur people. Applicant will not return to his home land until China 
becomes democratic. He met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
relationship with his PRC relatives] could create a risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.” 
 AG & 8(b) partially applies. There is no evidence that his parents or siblings are 
or have been political activists or are challenging the policies of the Chinese 
Government. There is no evidence his parents or siblings currently work or have ever 
worked for the Chinese military, or new media, or that of any other foreign government. 
More than ten years ago, shortly after Applicant stayed in the U.S. the Chinese 
authorities asked his parents when Applicant was coming home and what he was doing 
in the U.S.  
 Since 2000, there is no evidence that terrorists or the Chinese Government have 
approached or threatened Applicant, his parents, or siblings for any reason. There is no 
evidence that his relatives living in the PRC currently engages in activities which would 
bring attention to them or that they or other Chinese elements are even aware of 
Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that his relatives or Applicant 
would be targets for coercion or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” His son is a U.S. citizen, residing in the United States. In 1991, seventeen 
years ago, Applicant left his home to work at a folk dancer at a theme park 3000 miles 
from his home. In 1994, he came to a Chinese sponsored theme park in the U.S. This 
was the last time he saw his parents and siblings. In 1995, he obtained political asylum. 
In July 2003, on the happiest and best day of his life, Applicant became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. 
 AG & 8 (f) applies because he has no interest in property in any foreign country 
and he has significant U.S. property and assets. However, this mitigating factor has very 
limited weight in cases where AG && 7(a) and 7 (b) apply. 
 
 
 
 
10
                                                          
There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his 
close ties and his loyalties to the U.S., including his son (who is a U.S. born citizen); he 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. These mitigating conditions 
taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to XUAR and the heavy 
burden an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Seventeen years ago, Applicant left the PRC, which was the last time he saw his 
parents and siblings. Because he guides Army personal on local customs and nuances 
related to the spoken word and performs outstanding work, the Army views him as a 
valuable resource in helping it achieve its mission with the JTF. Applicant’s six years of 
service comprised four or five months of overseas tours before a brief return to his 
home. His service providing crucial assistance in the Global War on Terrorism is 
successful in the past because of his language and cultural skills gained in the XGAR 14  
14In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when “an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
 
 
 
11
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
While danger certainly exists for all living in the XGAR, Applicant’s parents and 
siblings are in no greater danger than any other individual living and working there. 
Applicant has no love for the Chinese government due to the government’s suppression 
of the Uyghur people. He was given refugee status because of the hostility of the PRC 
government for him and the XGAR people. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
he has relatives living in PRC. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
national security . . . [and therefore he] can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign 
power=s attempts at coercion or exploitation.” 
