                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-00019 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline E (personal 
conduct) but not under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 8 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated June 30, 2008). GE 8 is the 
source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Guidelines J (criminal conduct), E (personal conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue his security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on July 22, 2008, and elected to 
have his case decided with a hearing (Government Exhibit (GE) 9). On August 19, 
2008, the case was assigned to me. At the hearing held on September 17, 2008, 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits (GEs 1-6) (Transcript (Tr.) 17), and Applicant 
offered three exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-C) (Tr. 38-39). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GE 1-6 and AE A-C (Tr. 17, 39). I received the transcript on 
September 22, 2008.   
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of the SOR’s allegations, 
except for SOR ¶ 3c with explanations. His admissions are accepted and incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 30 years old (Tr. 5).4 He received a high school Graduate 
Equivalency Diploma (GED) in 1994 (Tr. 5). He attended community college for about 
two years off and on from 2003 to 2008 (Tr. 6, 28). He majored in management (Tr. 6). 
His grades in school are excellent (Tr. 28). He married in April 2004 (Tr. 18). He has a 
12-year-old step daughter, and a son, who was born in July 2005 (Tr. 19). He does not 
currently hold a security clearance (Tr. 38). He does not have any prior military service. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
In 1994, Applicant was found guilty of two misdemeanors. On August 16, 1994, 
he was found guilty of driving 74 miles per hour (mph) in a 55 mph zone on July 1, 
1994, and sentenced to a fine (SOR ¶ 1.a, GE 3 at 1, GE 9). On December 1, 1994, he 
was found guilty of driving 95 mph in a 55 mph zone on September 5, 1994, and 
sentenced to 10 days in jail (SOR ¶ 1.b, GE 3 at 2, GE 9). 
 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. GEs 2 (Responses to Interrogatories) and 9 (Response to 
SOR) are the sources for the facts in this section unless stated otherwise.   
  
4GE 1 (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated Jan. 24, 2007, will 
be referred to as a security clearance application in this decision). GE 1 is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph, and the next paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
In 1995, Applicant was found guilty of one misdemeanor. On June 26, 1995, he 
was found guilty of improper driving on June 13, 1995, and sentenced to a fine (SOR ¶ 
1.c, GE 3 at 4, GE 9). 
  
In 1997, Applicant was found guilty of one felony and misdemeanor. On April 17, 
1997, he was found guilty of unlawful wounding on or about September 8, 1996, and 
sentenced to five years in the state penitentiary (suspended), and placed on supervised 
probation for five years (SOR ¶ 1.d, GE 9). On July 21, 1997, the court found him guilty 
of improper driving on June 8, 1997, and sentenced to a fine (SOR ¶ 1.e, GE 3 at 7, GE 
9). 
 
In 1998, Applicant was found guilty of one misdemeanor. On August 10, 1998, he 
was found guilty of public intoxication on July 8, 1998, and sentenced to a fine (SOR ¶ 
1.f, GE 4 at 1, GE 9). 
 
In 2001, Applicant was found guilty of one misdemeanor. On August 27, 2001, he 
was found guilty of being drunk in public on July 16, 2001, and sentenced to a fine 
(SOR ¶ 1.g, GE 4 at 4, GE 9).  
 
In 2002, Applicant was found guilty of one misdemeanor. On March 29, 2002, he 
was found guilty of driving while intoxicated (DWI) on October 23, 2001 (GE 4 at 5, GE 
9, SOR ¶ 1.h). He sentenced to pay a fine and his license was suspended for one year. 
Id. 
 
On December 12, 2002, Applicant was arrested for several traffic offenses and 
DWI 2nd offense within five years (SOR ¶ 1.i, GE 4 at 8-13, GE 9). His blood alcohol 
was over the legal limit for alcohol. On February 28, 2003, all charges were nolle 
prossed.  Id.  
 
On September 14, 2003, Applicant was arrested for several traffic offenses and 
DWI (SOR ¶ 1.j, GE 4 at 14-16, GE 9). On December 12, 2003, he was convicted of 
DWI 2nd offense within five years, and sentenced to a $500 fine, court costs of $209, six 
months in jail (five months and 25 days suspended), and his license was suspended for 
three years.  Id.  
 
In his SOR response, dated July 22, 2008, Applicant said 95% of his offenses 
were alcohol-related (GE 9).  He said he no longer consumes alcohol, which he belived 
was the source of his past behavior problems (GE 9).   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
On February 22, 1999, Applicant was charged with No Seat Belt, a traffic 
infraction (SOR ¶ 2.a, GE 4 at 2, GE 9). On March 17, 1999, the court found him guilty, 
and fined him $25. Id.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
On July 12, 2000, Applicant was charged with Failure to Stop Prior to Entering 
Roadway, a traffic infraction (SOR ¶ 2.b, GE 4 at 2, GE 9). On August 3, 2000, the court 
found him guilty, and fined him $30. Id.  
 
On August 19, 2005, Applicant was charged with Speeding, a traffic infraction 
(SOR ¶ 2.c, GE 4 at 17, GE 9). On September 13, 2005, the court found him guilty, and 
fined him $75, and required payment of $56 for court costs. Id.  
 
On April 19, 2006, Applicant was charged with Speeding, a traffic infraction (SOR 
¶ 2.d, GE 4 at 18, GE 9). On September 13, 2005, the court found him guilty, and fined 
him $85 and required payment of $56 for court costs. Id. SOR ¶ 2.e noted a security 
concern related to the criminal conduct above. His 2006 arrest was his most recent 
arrest (Tr. 19).  He did not contest the accuracy of his arrests, tickets and convictions 
(GE 9, Tr. 34-35). 
 
Applicant has been fully candid about his offenses as listed in this section and 
the preceding section, Criminal Conduct (GE 9). He disclosed his alcohol-related 
offenses on his January 24, 2007, security clearance application (GE 1). 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
An alcohol-related security concern was noted in SOR ¶ 3.a because of the 
criminal offenses outlined in SOR ¶¶ 1.f to 1.j above.  Applicant was convicted of four 
alcohol-related offenses: (1) public intoxication on July 8, 1998; (2) drunk in public on 
July 16, 2001; (3) DWI on October 23, 2001; and (4) DWI 2nd Offense on September 14, 
2003. On December 12, 2002, Applicant was arrested for DWI and his blood alcohol 
was over the legal limit for alcohol. However, this offense was nolle prossed.   
 
Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was 15 or 16 (Tr. 29). He attended 
an alcohol safety program in 2001 (Tr. 31). The 2001 program focused on awareness of 
the problems that could be caused by alcohol use (Tr. 31). He was referred to alcohol 
treatment after his September 14, 2003, arrest and received 26 weeks of outpatient 
substance abuse treatment from March 15, 2004, to September 28, 2004 (SOR ¶ 3.b, 
GE 5, 9, Tr. 23-25, 32). He received a prognosis of “fair-to-good” and a diagnosis of 
303.90 Alcohol Dependence in Early Remission. Id.  The letter providing the prognosis 
and diagnosis was signed by a case manager with “MAC” and “NCC” next to her name, 
apparently indicating she is a “Master Addiction Counselor” and a “Nationally Certified 
Counselor.” Applicant was not aware of the alcohol dependence diagnosis until 2008 
(Tr. 23). He has not received any alcohol counseling after 2004 (35). 
 
Applicant attended hundreds of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) classes (Tr. 25). 
However, he did not have an AA sponsor (Tr. 26). He monitored his alcohol 
consumption from 2004 to 2008, and limited it to low levels (Tr. 24-25). He “sparingly 
consumed alcohol” about once every two weeks from March 2008 until July 2008, when 
he stopped drinking alcohol altogether (Tr. 20). Previously, he successfully abstained 
from alcohol consumption for up to about six months back in 1998 or 1999 (Tr. 20-22). 
He did not agree that he was dependent on alcohol (Tr. 27). He denied that he was an 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
alcoholic and that he currently abused alcohol (Tr. 36). His wife had to drive Applicant 
because he did not have a driver’s license, and she was anxious for him to complete the 
classes and attend AA meetings (Tr. 27). Even though he associates with people who 
drink alcohol, he does not drink alcohol himself (Tr. 28-29).  Sometimes he does not 
attend a party, if he knows alcohol is being consumed (Tr. 29). He currently has a valid 
driver’s license without driving restrictions (Tr. 29). 
 
Applicant recognized the importance of controlling his alcohol consumption for 
the sake of his family and his career with a government contractor (Tr. 25). The security 
clearance process has really “opened [his] eyes” about alcohol consumption issues (Tr. 
33-34, 41). He emphasized that since 2004 he had married, no longer associated with 
the alcohol-drinking single crowd, and had better judgment (Tr. 36-37. In July 2008, he 
recognized that he did not need to consume alcohol and he wanted to change his life 
and future prospects for the better (Tr. 34, 41). 
 
Recommendations  
 
Two of Applicant’s supervisors and a co-worker at his current employment 
provided three letters supporting reinstatement of his clearance (AE A-C). They have 
known Applicant for about five years. They describe Applicant as a valuable member of 
the firm with a solid work ethic, leadership, willingness to learn and integrity. His 
contributions to his company have been numerous and valuable. His work is always 
professional. He is dependable, generous, honest, trustworthy, loyal and helpful. He 
loves his family and his friends and respects others in the community.  
 
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must 
consider Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are 
used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply 
these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process 
provision in Section E2.2, Enclosure 2, of the Directive. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
 
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that the issuance of the 
clearance is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.5 The government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 
provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” The burden of disproving a mitigating 
condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a 
relationship that transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours 
as well. It is because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose 
a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise 
of classified information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.”  See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
 
5 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6‟The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, [evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and [decides] whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), E (Personal Conduct) and G (alcohol 
consumption) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.j (except for 1.i) are 
established. Applicant was convicted of eight misdemeanors and one felony. He 
admitted all offenses.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to the offenses in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.j. 
Four of the criminal offenses are alcohol-related, and others may be alcohol-related. In 
his SOR response, Applicant said 95% of his offenses were alcohol related (GE 9). 
There is still a risk that Applicant will return to alcohol abuse and that more offenses will 
occur. See Discussion in Alcohol Consumption Section, infra. There are some positive 
signs of rehabilitation. He admitted his misconduct and has no criminal offenses after 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
September 13, 2003, which is over five years ago. He is now married, has a family, and 
has performed well at his employment. He has stopped associating with his single 
friends, reducing the associations that enabled and facilitated his alcohol abuse. He 
completed his probation, paid his fines and court costs, and his driver’s license is fully 
restored. He has demonstrated remorse and been substantially reformed. He received 
job training and has a good employment record. There is a sufficient evidentiary record 
in this case of his rehabilitation to merit a clearance eventually, provided his good 
behavior and alcohol abstinent behavior continue.  
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior .  .  .  .  ; and (3) a pattern 
of .  .  .  rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
SOR ¶ 2.a – 2.d allege four traffic violations in 1999, 2000, 2005 and 2006. SOR 
¶ 2.e re-alleges all of the criminal offenses in SOR ¶ 1 discussed above as personal 
conduct security concerns. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d)(1), 16(d)(3) and 16(e)(1) all apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
*  *  * 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶ 17(c) mitigates SOR ¶ 2.a – 2.d because his four traffic violations in 1999, 
2000, 2005 and 2006 are relatively minor. They resulted in fines of $25, $35, $75, and 
$85. They are infrequent.   
 
SOR ¶ 2.e lists alcohol-related criminal offenses. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d) and 17(g) all 
apply in part. These criminal offenses cannot be mitigated for the reasons stated in the 
next section. See Discussion in Alcohol Consumption Section, infra. There is still a risk 
that Applicant will return to alcohol abuse and that more alcohol-related offenses will 
occur. There are some positive signs of rehabilitation. He admitted his misconduct and 
has no criminal offenses after September 13, 2003, which is over five years ago. He is 
now married, has a family, and has performed well at his employment. He has stopped 
associating with his single friends, reducing the associations that enabled and facilitated 
his alcohol abuse. See AG ¶ 16(g). He completed his probation, paid his fines and court 
costs, and his driver’s license is fully restored. He has demonstrated remorse and been 
substantially reformed. He received job training and has a good employment record.  
There is a solid evidentiary record in this case of his rehabilitation. Most importantly, AG 
¶ 17(e) fully applies. He disclosed his alcohol-related offenses on his January 24, 2007, 
security clearance application (GE 1). His security manager is well aware of his alcohol-
related problems. Disclosure has eliminated his “vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
AG ¶¶ 22(b), 22(c), 22(d), 22(e), 22(f) and 22(g) do not apply. Applicant did not 
have any alcohol-related incidents at work. Currently, he does not habitually consume 
or engage in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment. Binge 
drinking is not defined in the Directive and is not established. A qualified medical 
professional or licensed clinical social worker did not determine Applicant had an 
alcohol abuse or dependence problem. He did not fail to follow any court orders 
regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment or abstinence. Although he received 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
an alcohol evaluation from an addiction counselor, this credential does not meet the 
requirements of AG ¶¶ 22(d) or 22(e). He received counseling in an “alcohol safety 
program” in 2001 and admitted he subsequently had a relapse; however, there is 
insufficient evidence that this was “an alcohol rehabilitation program.” Additionally, the 
outpatient alcohol treatment program he received in 2004 did not result in advice to 
abstain from alcohol consumption.  It would be unfair to require abstention when he was 
not told it was required. 
AG ¶ 22(a) applies. Applicant was convicted of two DWIs, drunk in public and 
public intoxication.   
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) applies in part because Applicant had only four documented alcohol-
related incidents between 1998 and 2003 that had an adverse effect on his life. He was 
convicted of two DWIs, drunk in public and public intoxication. These four events 
considered in isolation are somewhat infrequent or isolated, and not recent. He does not 
drink alcohol and drive, and accordingly he receives some credit because, “it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a), 
cannot be fully applied because he continued to consume alcohol up until July 2008. 
Additionally, he admitted returning to alcohol consumption after previously abstaining 
from alcohol consumption for up to six months. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 23(b) to 23(d) do not fully apply. Applicant did not acknowledge being 
alcohol dependent or being an alcoholic. He is minimizing his alcohol consumption 
problem. Although he completed an alcohol abuse treatment program in 2004, he 
stopped attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and does not currently attend any 
other alcohol treatment program. He stopped consuming alcohol in July 2008 just about 
two months before his hearing. He did not fully recognize that his alcohol problem raises 
security concerns until too recently to receive full mitigating credit.  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of more substantial 
alcohol abuse than Applicant’s that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).  For 
example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant 
continued to drink even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s 
application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 
2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol 
(not to intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued 
alcohol consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary 
and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) 
(involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and 
reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
After careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, I conclude his continued alcohol consumption up until July 2008 is simply 
too recent to mitigate all alcohol consumption security concerns.     
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
There is considerable evidence supporting approval of his clearance. Applicant 
revealed his alcohol-related offenses on his security clearance application, in his 
response to DOHA interrogatories, and at his hearing. He does not associate with his 
alcohol consuming friends. Now that he is married, has a family and is in the workforce, 
the consequences of alcohol abuse will be more severe. He has avoided alcohol-related 
criminal offenses for five years. He completed an alcohol safety program in 2001, an 
alcohol treatment program in 2004, and received the benefit of “hundreds” of Alcoholics 
Anonymous sessions. His prognosis from the 2004 alcohol treatment program was “fair-
to-good.” Applicant is a valued employee with excellent potential. There is no evidence 
at his current employment of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of 
disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His law-abiding 
character and good work performance over the last five years show some responsibility, 
rehabilitation and mitigation. His co-workers and supervisors support approval of his 
clearance. I am satisfied that his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his 
current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations shows future 
potential for access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a substantial problem with alcohol abuse and/or dependence for many 
years. He has four alcohol-related involvements with law enforcement resulting in 
criminal convictions. Nevertheless, he continued to drink alcohol up until July 2008. His 
decisions to engage in criminal conduct after consuming alcohol to intoxication were 
knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. Excessive alcohol consumption shows a lack of judgment 
and/or impulse control. His problems with alcohol cannot be mitigated at this time. Such 
conduct raises a serious security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted at 
this time. However, if Applicant can continue to abstain from alcohol consumption for 
another year, he will have shown sufficient judgment and self-control to warrant 
favorable consideration for access to classified information.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to personal conduct, but not criminal conduct or alcohol 
consumption.    
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
                                            
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
