DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )         ISCR Case No. 08-00600
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 2 July 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
B.  Applicant answered the SOR 26 July 2008, and requested a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 12 August 2008, and I convened a hearing 19 September
2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 26 September 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. She is a 39-year-old
undergraduate teaching assistant employed by a defense contractor since January
2005. She seeks to retain the interim clearance she held until the SOR was issued.
Applicant was born in the U.S. in February 1979, to Iranian nationals residing in
the U.S. while her father attended school. She obtained U.S. citizenship by birth and
derived Iranian citizenship through her parents. In 1980 or 1981, she returned to Iran
with her parents, and resided continuously there until April 1999.
Applicant was raised and educated in Iran. However, her goal was always to
return to the U.S. to live. When she war four or five years old, she understood that she
was a U.S. citizen and could move here as soon as she was able. She began studying
English so her English could be as good as possible when that day arrived. She had
hoped to persuade her parents to let her return to the U.S. to attend high school and
college, but was unable to do so. She completed two years of college in Iran before she
convinced them that she was old enough to live on her own in the U.S. When she
returned to the U.S., she began taking computer courses at a local community college,
ultimately obtaining her associate’s degree in computer science. In February 2007, she
obtained her undergraduate degree in computer science. She worked to fund her
education.
When Applicant returned to the U.S., she exited Iran on the Iranian passport
required for her to leave the country. She used that passport once to enter Iran—in
June 2001—when she traveled to visit her parents. That passport expired in September
2003. Applicant shredded her Iranian passport in her personal shredder when she
applied for her clearance. She keeps her U.S. passport current. She does not intend to
return to Iran.
Applicant has been married for a year to a native-born U.S. citizen. They jointly
own their home, valued at $350,000. They plan to live in the U.S. and raise their family
here. Applicant volunteers her time in the local community, and serves on the diversity
council at work. She has a retirement account with her employer.
Although her parents are resident citizens of Iran, they are also legal permanent
residents (LPR) of the U.S. They visit Applicant in the U.S. every year. They are saving
to be able to move to the U.S. without having to rely on Applicant or public assistance
for support. Her father is a civil engineer for a private company; her mother is a self-
employed counselor for teenagers. Applicant’s brother is also a resident citizen of Iran,
whom Applicant has sponsored for his visa to immigrate to the U.S. He is a public
relations manager for a private firm. None of Applicant’s family members have any
connection to the Iranian government. Applicant has no financial interests in Iran. She
has disavowed any inheritance she might receive from her parents, so her brother will
inherit their estate.
3
Applicant’s coworkers and character references consider her honest and
trustworthy. During the time she had an interim clearance, she demonstrated that she
can handle classified information appropriately.
Iran is a fundamentalist Islamic republic with a poor human rights record. Its
relations with the U.S. are confrontational and unlikely to improve given Iran’s efforts to
acquire nuclear weapons, its sponsorship of, support for, and involvement in,
international terrorism, and its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process. Nevertheless, Iran is not a known collector of U.S. intelligence or sensitive
economic information, nor is it known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected
information. 
Travel to Iran remains problematic. The Department of State’s May 2007 Travel
Warning continues to warn U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks of travel to Iran,
noting that dual national Iranian-American citizens may encounter difficulty in departing
Iran. Some elements of the Iranian government and population remain hostile to the
U.S. Consequently, American citizens may be subject to harassment or arrest while
traveling or residing in Iran. Americans of Iranian origin are urged to consider the risk of
being targeted by authorities before planning travel to Iran. In addition, Iranian
authorities may deny dual nationals access to the U.S. Interests Section in Tehran,
because they are considered to be solely Iranian citizens. Large-scale demonstrations
have taken place in various regions throughout Iran over the past several years as a
result of a sometimes volatile political climate. U.S. citizens who travel to Iran despite
the travel warning are urged to exercise caution.
The U.S. government does not currently have diplomatic or consular relations
with the Islamic Republic of Iran, and, therefore, cannot provide protection or routine
consular services to American citizens in Iran. The Swiss government, acting through its
Embassy in Tehran, serves as protecting power for U.S. interests in Iran. Neither U.S.
passports nor visas to the United States are issued in Tehran. The Iranian government
does not recognize dual citizenship and generally does not permit the Swiss to provide
protective services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals. In addition, U.S.
citizens of Iranian origin who are considered by Iran to be Iranian citizens have been
detained and harassed by Iranian authorities.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).4
4
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline B
(Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information3
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Security4
concerns may also be raised if there are connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(b).5
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 8.(a).6
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 8.(b).7
5
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.5
Applicant has frequent and close contact with her parents who are resident
citizens of Iran. However, they are also LPRs of the U.S., intending to immigrate to the
U.S. as soon as they are financially able. Applicant is similarly close to her brother, who
she has sponsored for his U.S. immigration visa. Nevertheless, none of them is
connected in any way to the Iranian government. In addition, Applicant has not traveled
to Iran in over seven years, and has no intent to do so in the future. She has shredded
the expired Iranian passport that would otherwise be required to enter Iran. Under
Guideline B, the mere existence of a foreign family member is not sufficient. The nature
of Applicant’s contact with the family member must be examined to determine whether it
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. “Heightened” is a relative term denoting increased risk over some normally
existing risk that can be said to be inherent anytime a family member lives subject to a
foreign government. One factor that heightens the risk in Applicant’s case is the nature
of the Iranian government and its hostility towards the United States.
In assessing Applicant’s potential for foreign influence, I have considered the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of
the U.S.  I have also considered whether there is no conflict of interest, either because6
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government,
or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.7
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.” Thus, an administrative judge
could not apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk. Under the new
guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if
an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest.
The nature of the government of Iran, its disregard for human rights, and its
pursuit of nuclear weapons place a heavy burden on Applicant in mitigating the
disqualifying conditions and the security concerns. Countering that somewhat is the fact
that Iran is not a known collector of U.S. information. Applicant has close relationships
6
with her parents and brother. However, given their lack of connection to the Iranian
government, it is highly unlikely that there could be a circumstance where Applicant is
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of her family and the
government of Iran or interests of the United States because of the nature of the Iranian
government. 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty is demonstrably to the U.S. She has little if any sense
of loyalty to Iran. She was born in the U.S. and had a life-long goal of returning to her
native land. She contemplated leaving Iran as a teenager, and left Iran as soon as she
could convince her parents that she was old enough to manage being in the U.S. alone,
before she finished college. She completed her education here, married and purchased
a home here, established roots here. She is actively pursuing bringing her brother here.
Her sense of loyalty or obligation is not to Iran but to the United States. In a telling
moment in the hearing, Applicant acknowledged her understanding that “we don’t have
very good relations with them.” A conflict of interest in this case is extremely unlikely. In
balancing all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I am satisfied Applicant’s
loyalty to the United States is such that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the United States. Accordingly, Applicant has met her heavy burden
to show that her contacts with her family in Iran do not cause a security concern. I
conclude Applicant has mitigated security concerns rising from her contact with her
family in Iran. I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted. 
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
