                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04279 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Father], Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 2, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 10, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
through L which were admitted without objections. The record was left open until 
September 18, 2009 to allow Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents, 
which he did. The documents were marked as AE M through Q and being no objection 
from Department Counsel, they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 18, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old computer systems analyst who has worked for a 
federal contractor since November 2007. Applicant attended college from 2000 to 2005, 
graduating in May 2005, with a degree in computer systems. He married in March 2008 
and has no children. 
 
 Applicant incurred student loan debts while attending college. He also incurred 
credit card debts that were used for living expenses while he was in college. He made 
some payments on these debts for a period of time. He received grants and reduced 
tuition for three of his five years in college. He was employed while attending college, 
but lost his job. He had difficulty finding another job during this time and got behind in 
his obligations. After he graduated he attempted to find a full time job. During this time 
he worked part-time jobs to support himself, but it was not enough to pay his student 
loans and credit card debts and they became delinquent. Six months after applying for a 
job with his current employer he was hired.1  
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.a does not belong to Applicant. The government 
conceded that the debt is not Applicant’s responsibility.2 
 
 The debts listed in SOR 1.b and 1.c are the same as the debt listed in SOR 1.l 
and 1.m. Applicant contacted the creditor for his student loans and consolidated all of 
his student loan debts.3 He set up a payment plan with the creditor, made consistent 
payments, whereupon they agreed to remove his loans from a delinquent status and 
permitted him to defer regular monthly payments until January 2009. Applicant is using 
the monthly payment amount he had been paying for his student loans to pay off other 
debts. He will resume paying his student loans in January 2009 as permitted by the 
creditor.4  
 
1 Tr. 50-62. 
 
2 Tr. 21-22. 
 
3 The debts listed in SOR 1.b, and 1.c are the same debts as listed in 1.l and 1.m. The creditor 
listed in SOR 1.b and 1.c bought the loans from the creditors in 1.l and 1.m.  
 
4 Tr. 22-36; AE D and G. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debts listed in SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.k and 1.j have been consolidated 
and are included in a debt management program. Applicant has been making consistent 
automatic monthly payments of $258 toward this program to reduce and satisfy these 
debts.5  
 
 Applicant has paid the debt listed in SOR 1.i.6  
 
 Applicant is married, but he and his wife each live with their parents to save 
money until he pays off his delinquent debts. He pays nominal rent and other household 
expenses. He earns approximately $25,000 a year (before taxes). He does not have 
any credit cards. He owns a 1991 car that is paid for. He anticipates with the debt 
management program he will have his delinquent debts paid off in 12 months, excluding 
his student loans. The debts he incurred were while he was in college. He was working 
while in college, but the company dissolved and he lost his job. He did find other work 
while in college and paid what he could, but it was not enough to keep up. He 
understands his duty to be fiscally responsible and now that he has a job he is anxious 
to pay his delinquent debts and attain his career goals. He has a budget that he abides 
by.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
5 Tr. 36-48; AE J, N, O, P and Q. At his hearing Applicant thought that SOR 1.e and 1.k might 
have been the same debt. The additional documents provided confirm they are not and he has provided 
supporting documents to show he added the debt in 1.k to his debt management program. 
 
6 Tr. 44-45, 59; AE I. 
 
7 Tr. 56-64. 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Appellant had 
delinquent debts that he failed to pay when due. I find the evidence raised both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising form financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
 
5 
 
 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶20 (a) (“The behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation”), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (‘the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”).  
 
 Applicant incurred debts while he was in college. He paid his bills while he was 
employed, but lost his job and had difficulty finding a new job. During this period of time 
he got behind in paying his bills. When he graduated from college he had a difficult time 
finding a full time job. He worked at low paying part-time jobs until he was hired by his 
current employer. Since becoming employed in November 2007, he has consolidated 
his student loans and brought them out of a default status and they are now deferred 
until January 2009. He has placed his other debts in a debt consolidation program and 
is making consistent automatic monthly payments. Those debts not included in the 
program were paid. Applicant’s failure to pay his debts happened under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. He acted responsibly when he gained employment. Therefore, 
I find his actions do not cast doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability or good judgment. 
Applicant did not merely disregard his debts; he was unable to pay them because he 
was attempting to find employment. Once he got a job he resumed his payments, 
consolidated his debts and started paying his student loans. I find the conditions that 
caused the financial problems were beyond Applicant’s control and once he got back on 
his feet he acted responsibly and addressed his debts. Therefore, I find (b) applies. 
Applicant did not present evidence that he has received financial counseling, but there 
are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. Therefore, I find (c) applies. Applicant has all of his debts consolidated and is 
making consistent monthly payments through automatic withdrawal from his account. I 
find he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors and (d) applies.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
 
6 
 
 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who has 
just started his career. He incurred credit card and student loan debts while attending 
college. He worked part-time in school to help defray his expenses. While employed he 
paid his debts. Once he graduated he had difficulty finding a job. He lives at home and 
pays his parents nominal rent and contributes towards the household expenses. 
Although he is married he and his wife do not live together because he wants to pay off 
all of his debts first. He is managing his money. He has a student loan deferment and is 
paying his other debts. He plans to completely pay off all of his delinquent debts within a 
year. He does not have any credit cards. He owns an old car. He has many goals and 
hopes to progress in his career. He understands the importance of paying his bills and 
now that he has a job he is committed to being fiscally responsible. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
