                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-00047 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H.Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 12, 2007. On 
May 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines G and J. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 2, 2008; answered it on 
June 9; 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on July 10, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on 
July 29, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 29, 2008, scheduling the 
hearing for August 26, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. The 
record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 11, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the facts alleged in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old chemical engineer for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since October 2004. He has never held a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant first consumed alcohol at age 13, when he consumed three or four 
beers and became intoxicated. Two or three months later, he drank to the point of 
intoxication and became very ill. After that occasion, he abstained from drinking until 
age 18 (AX A at 4). He told a security investigator that he consumed 10-12 drinks every 
weekend while in college. He remembers blacking out eight to ten times (GX 6 at 5).  
 
 In September 2002, Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI), 
a misdemeanor, after a breathalyzer test indicated a blood-alcohol level of .13%. He 
was convicted of driving while impaired, a lesser offense, and was fined. In January 
2003, he enrolled in a three-day inpatient treatment program and was diagnosed as an 
alcoholic. The medical credentials of the person who diagnosed him are not reflected in 
the record (GX 6 at 1-2).  
 
 In September 2004, Applicant was charged with DWI, driving with a blood-
alcohol level of .08%, and speeding. His blood-alcohol level was about .16%. He was 
fined and placed on supervised probation. He was released from probation after about 
18 months (Tr. 57). Pursuant to a court order, he attended an addiction recovery center 
and participated in outpatient group counseling from October 2004 to March 2005. He 
was diagnosed as an alcoholic by a state credentialed alcoholism and substance abuse 
counselor (AX A at 5; AX C).  
 
 After completing treatment at the addiction recovery center, he abstained from 
consuming alcohol for about 18 months. He avoided contact with his former drinking 
friends and avoided locations associated with drinking. He did not join any support 
groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) (AX A at 5). He relapsed once in February 
 
3 
 
 
2006, consuming seven to nine drinks, and he lied to his probation officer about it (AX A 
at 8). 
 
 After about 18 months, Applicant decided he could manage his alcohol 
consumption. He wanted to associate with his old friends and enjoy their 
companionship. He “no longer had any outside influence such as probation or outpatient 
treatment” to remind him of the consequences of his alcohol use (AX A at 5; Tr. 60). He 
began drinking to the point of intoxication once or twice a week (Tr. 93). 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was charged with felony DWI, driving with a blood-
alcohol level of .08%, and speeding. His blood-alcohol level was about .16%. In 
November 2006, while these charges were pending, he voluntarily enrolled in an 
outpatient substance abuse treatment program, and he successfully completed it in May 
2007. He was again diagnosed as an alcoholic by a credentialed alcoholism and 
substance abuse counselor. In accordance with his counselor’s recommendation, he 
began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings twice a week and obtained a 
sponsor.  
 
In July 2007, Applicant entered pleas to the October 2006 charges, pleading 
guilty to misdemeanor DWI and speeding. A formal conviction was not entered. In 
August 2007, he was placed in a drug court program consisting of frequent court 
appearances, daily call-in requirements, group counseling, meetings with probation 
officers, random urinalysis, periodic interviews with a case worker, and participation in 
AA or a similar organization (AX D). His participation agreement with the drug court 
provided for sanctions for non-compliance, including community service and one year in 
jail (GX 3 at 4; AX A at 7). In September 2007, he told a security investigator that he 
believed he was once physically dependent on alcohol, but as of the date of the 
interview he believed he was no longer alcohol dependent (GX 6 at 5). On August 4, 
2008, he successfully completed the drug court program, with no relapses or instances 
of non-compliance (AX I). He is no longer on probation (Tr. 89). His driver’s license was 
revoked, and it will not be reinstated until he completes a seven-week course of 
instruction administered by the department of motor vehicles (Tr. 90-91).  
 
 Applicant last drank to the point of intoxication in October 2006, when he was 
charged with felony DWI. He last consumed alcohol when he took a sip of champagne 
at Thanksgiving dinner with his grandparents in November 2006 (Tr. 80). As of the date 
of the hearing, he was attending two to four AA meetings a week, meeting with his AA 
sponsor or other friends in recovery at least once a week, and serving as treasurer and 
meeting host for his group (AX A at 13; Tr. 77, 81). His current girlfriend also is a 
recovering alcoholic (Tr. 81). Other than colleagues at work, most of his friends are also 
alcoholics in recovery (Tr. 98-99). 
 
 In March 2007, April 2008, and May 2008, Applicant received significant 
promotions and pay increases from his employer (AX H). He has starting exercising 
regularly. He actively participates as a volunteer in a Junior Achievement Program 
sponsored by his employer, teaching school children about business and economics 
 
4 
 
 
(Tr. 71, 100-01). In July 2008, Applicant was accepted into a master’s degree program, 
with classes beginning in the fall of 2008 (AX J). 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor for the past two years is aware of his alcohol-related 
problems. He testified Applicant is one of the finest people he has worked with. He has 
no concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment, and he describes 
him an exemplary employee (Tr. 105-08). 
 
 Applicant’s AA sponsor has known Applicant for about 18 months (Tr. 117). He 
testified Applicant is “well on his way” through the steps to recovery (Tr. 115). He 
believes Applicant has “made some pretty substantial strides,” changed his behavior, 
and stepped away from situations that could jeopardize his continued sobriety (Tr. 114-
117). He testified there has been a “definite transformation” in the way Applicant 
interacts at AA meetings. He believes Applicant’s active participation in AA is a good 
indicator that Applicant will not go back to drinking again (Tr. 122). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
 
5 
 
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with alcohol-related driving 
offenses in September 2002, September 2004, and October 2006; and that after the last 
offense he was sentenced to a drug court program (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). It also alleges 
Applicant completed one alcohol education program and two alcohol abuse treatment 
programs (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence . . ., regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(a). Applicant’s three alcohol-related driving 
offenses are sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition. 
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c). “Binge drinking” is 
“the consumption of five or more drinks in a row on at least one occasion.”  U.S. Dept. 
of Health & Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 
6 
 
 
Administration, The  National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Binge Drinking Among 
Underage Persons, Apr. 11, 2002, available at  http://www.oas.samhsa.gov. Applicant’s 
history of heavy alcohol consumption raises this disqualifying condition.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised either by “diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence” or by “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.” AG ¶ 22(d) and (e). Applicant was diagnosed with 
alcoholism three times. “Alcoholism” is “chronic alcohol abuse, dependence, or 
addiction.” Stedman’s Medical Dictionary at 44 (26th ed. 1995). The term “alcoholism” 
does not appear in DSM IV. In previous versions of the DSM, it was synonymous with 
alcohol dependence. The credentials of the person making the first diagnosis are not 
reflected in the record. The second and third diagnoses were by a certified alcoholism 
and substance abuse counselor. The government produced no evidence of the 
qualifications for this designation, nor did it produce any evidence that such a person is 
qualified or authorized to make a medical diagnosis. I conclude AG ¶ 22(d) and (e) are 
not raised.  
 
Although the enumerated disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) are not 
raised, I have considered Applicant’s admission at the hearing as well as his admission 
to a security investigator that he was alcohol dependent. These admissions are 
incorporated below in my whole person analysis. 
 
Finally, a disqualifying condition may be raised by “relapse after diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” AG 
¶ 22(f). Applicant completed a three-day inpatient treatment program in January 2003 
and a five-month outpatient program in March 2005, and he relapsed after completing 
each program. The first element of this disqualifying condition is not met, because the 
record does not reflect the qualifications of the persons who diagnosed Applicant as an 
alcoholic. I have considered Applicant’s admissions of alcohol dependence and the 
evidence of his two relapses in my whole person analysis. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ (a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). This mitigating 
condition has four disjunctive prongs. The first prong of this mitigating condition focuses 
on the recentness of the conduct. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
 
7 
 
 
totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If 
the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.@ Id. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcoholic drink was his sip of champagne in November 2006. His 
last drinking binge was in October 2006, 22 months before the hearing. On its face, this 
period of sobriety is “a significant period of time.” He appears to have finally realized he 
cannot drink in moderation, and to have recognized his need for changed behavior and 
a support structure. On the other hand, Applicant was constrained by the rigorous 
requirements of the drug court program until August 4, 2008, less than a month before 
the hearing. Under the drug court program, he faced a year in jail for non-compliance. 
He admitted at the hearing that his relapse after 18 months of sobriety in 2006 occurred 
because he no longer had external constraining influences such as probation or 
outpatient treatment. I am not satisfied that his abstinence under the strictures of the 
drug court program is sufficient to establish rehabilitation. More time is needed for him 
to demonstrate he can maintain sobriety without external constraints. Thus, I conclude 
the first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct was frequent, not the product of unusual 
circumstances, and raises doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. Thus, I conclude none of four prongs of AG ¶ 23(a) are established.  
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant has 
acknowledged his alcohol dependence and completed an alcohol treatment program, 
but he has not yet established a “pattern” of abstinence that is not dependent on 
external constraints. I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is not established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual is a 
current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no 
history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress.” AG ¶ 
23(c). Applicant’s previous history of treatment and relapse precludes application of this 
mitigating condition. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.” AG ¶ 23(d). Applicant successfully completed the drug court program, which 
 
8 
 
 
apparently had no aftercare requirements; but, as noted above, he has not 
demonstrated an established pattern of abstinence. Furthermore, there is no evidence 
of a favorable prognosis. I conclude AG ¶ 23(d) is not established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges under this guideline the same conduct alleged under 
Guideline G. The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a 
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s three alcohol-related arrests alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established, for the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 
23(a) under Guideline G. 
 
Security concerns based on criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). As noted above in the discussion of AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (b) under Guideline G, there 
is insufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation based on passage of time. On the 
other hand, Applicant has expressed remorse, he is furthering his education, he has 
performed well at work and received promotions, and he is actively involved in 
community activities. I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is partially established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. I have 
incorporated my above comments concerning Guidelines G and J in my whole person 
analysis. 
 
 Applicant has made great strides toward turning his life around. He was candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. As of the date of the hearing, he had done 
everything he could to overcome his past and mitigate his conduct. He admits he is an 
alcoholic and cannot drink in moderation. He is on the right path. The only unanswered 
question is whether he can maintain sobriety without external constraints on his 
behavior. The hearing was less than a month after he graduated from the drug court 
program, and more time is needed to determine whether he can maintain his sobriety 
without external constraints on his behavior. See Directive ¶ E3.1.37 through E3.1.40 
(reconsideration authorized after one year).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
