                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01874
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
HISTORY OF CASE
On May 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 2, 2008, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on June 16, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on July 16,
2008.  A hearing was held on July 16, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether it
would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of two
exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.)
2
was received on July 23, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to consider retention of
his Swedish passport and document its surrender should he make the decision to do so.
For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 10 days, to July 28, 2008 to supplement
the record. The Government was afforded two days to respond.  Within the time
permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a faxed cover sheet, letter confirming
his decision to surrender his Swedish passport and documented surrender of his
passport to his employer’s facility security officer (FSO).  Department counsel did not
object to these post-hearing submissions. Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were
admitted and considered as exhibits A and B.  
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline C, Applicant is alleged to (a) be a dual citizen of the U.S. and
Sweden, (b) possess a valid Swedish passport that does not expire till December 12,
2012, ©) have used his Swedish passport on trips to European countries in July 1985,
May 1998, April 2001, November 2002, and March 2008, (d) have indicated an
unwillingness to surrender, destroy, or invalidate his Swedish passport, (e) have
indicated he used his Swedish passport to protect his financial or business interests, (f)
have resided in and were employed in Sweden from December 1999 to April 2001, and
(g) has a pension account from the government of Sweden that will remain in effect until
he retires.
For his answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with
explanations. He claimed he became a Swedish citizen as a minor, and his Swedish
citizenship is based solely on a parent’s citizenship. 
In his answer, Applicant claimed his visits to European countries were mostly
family-oriented, with the only exception being the academic research work he pursued at
a Swedish technical university in the field of noise and vibration control for civil
transportation he pursued.  He claimed his Swedish pension account was created for
him when he studied at a Swedish technical university and was very small. It is an
account he would be happy to close, assuming that it is possible to do so.  Applicant’s
research did not encounter any conflicts with the security interests of the U.S.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 35-year-old engineering specialist for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
3
Applicant’s background
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth (see ex. 1; R.T. ,at 21).  He is unmarried and
has no children (R.T., at 29).  He holds undergraduate and graduates in the sciences
from recognized American universities. 
All of Applicant’s immediate family members are U.S. citizens.  He became a
Swedish citizen as a minor through his mother’s Swedish citizenship (R.T., at 21-22, 27).
He never took an oath of allegiance to Sweden and has no plans to do so (R.T., at 33).
His mother arranged for his Swedish citizenship, and Applicant had nothing to do with
the application process.  
Applicant possessed a valid Swedish passport for Swedish identity and family
heritage reasons (R.T., at 22), and last used it in March 2008 (R.T., at 42).  The passport
is due to expire in December 2012 (R.T., at 39). He has held three passports, and
obtained his current passport in December 2007 by filing a renewal application (R.T., at
40-41).   He has traveled to European Union (EU) countries using his Swedish passport
mostly for family and cultural reasons (R.T., at 22, 43-44).  He never used his Swedish
passport to protect his financial interests, but expressed plans to retain the passport (see
ex. 2; R.T., at 23-24).  He repeated his reluctance to surrender or destroy his Swedish
passport, but requested time to reconsider his decision (see ex. 2; R.T., at 49-52).  If
afforded an option to surrender his Swedish passport at this time, he indicated he would
strongly consider it (R.T., at 52-54).  Following the hearing, he documented his surrender
of his Swedish passport to his employer’s FSO (see ex. D).
Applicant worked and lived in Sweden between December 1998 and April 2001
(compare ex. 1 with R.T., at 23-25, 35-36, 61), while conducting scientific research at a
Swedish technical university in the field of noise and vibration control for civil
transportation. His academic work included taking and teaching classes (R.T., at 38).
Applicant has no desire to take up permanent residence  in Sweden.  
Applicant has a Swedish pension account worth about $160.00 (R.T., at 25-26,
61-62).  This account was created for him by the Swedish university he worked for while
enrolled at the university.   This account is particularly small when compared to his U.S.
portfolio, which includes his home valued at $255,000.00 and his equity in the home,
valued at around $75,000.00 (R.T., at 60).  He has no special interest in retaining the
account, and he could probably close it. 
Applicant has no business or financial interest in Sweden besides the pension
account and has no plans to invest in the country.  He has never voted in a Swedish
election or served in the Swedish military.  He has no debts or obligations to Sweden or
any foreign country.  And he has accepted no educational, medical, or other benefits
from Sweden that required his use of his Swedish citizenship, save for his small pension
(R.T., at 63-64).  He acknowledged only his small pension and his being treated by a
Swedish doctor for a sore throat (R.T., at 64).
4
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by administrative
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the
administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the administrative judge to assess these factors
exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines,
administrative judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing
extenuation and mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the
Directive, which are intended to assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and
impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the
interests of the United States.  See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 9.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to
do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the
record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends,
in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversary
proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical
basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that
are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s]
alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a
material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The
required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the Government to
affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified
information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, consideration must take
account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
safeguard classified information.
5
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing
his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
Analysis 
Applicant presents as a U.S. citizen by birth who became a naturalized citizen of
Sweden through his mother, who had Swedish citizenship by birth.  Aside from possessing a
Swedish passport and using it on several occasions to enter and exit Sweden principally for
family reasons, Applicant has never exercised any active indicia of dual citizenship with
Sweden. Claiming his principal affections lie with the U.S., he, nonetheless, retained his
Swedish passport and a small Swedish pension account at the time of hearing. 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite critical
considerations over acts indicating a preference or not for the interests of the foreign country
over the interests of the U.S.  The issues, as such, raise concerns over Applicant’s
preference for a foreign country over the U.S.
By virtue of his naturalized citizenship in Sweden to his mother of Swedish birth and
citizenship, Applicant was endowed with Swedish citizenship, which could be renounced by
his expressed intention or actions.  This, Applicant  has never done, out of respect for his
mother.  Since becoming a naturalized Swedish citizen as a young boy, Applicant has taken
no actions and exercised no Swedish privileges that can be fairly characterized as active
indicia of dual citizenship, save for (a) his limited use of his  Swedish passport when traveling
to European countries and (b) his possession of a small pension account.  He has not voted
in Swedish elections or served in the Swedish military.  He holds only a small pension account
in Sweden of $160.00, which is quite minimal when compared to his U.S. asset portfolio, and
has accepted no preferential educational, medical or other benefits from Sweden since
becoming a naturalized Swedish citizen.  Nor has he ever performed or attempted to perform
duties, or otherwise acted so as to serve the interests of Sweden in preference to the interests
of the U.S. since becoming a Swedish citizen.
Because Applicant possessed and used his Swedish passport and retains a small
earned pension right in Sweden as the result of his brief work for a Swedish technical
university between 1999 and 2001, the Government may apply disqualifying condition (DC) ¶
10(a) of AG ¶ 9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes
but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other  
 such benefits from a foreign country; 
6
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
          another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;
(7) voting in a foreign election.”  
 However, Applicant’s residence time in Sweden was very brief (1999-2001) and was
limited to his time spend in academic pursuits at a Swedish technical university.  He claims no
intention to make Sweden his permanent residence.  He never voted in a Swedish election
and never served in the Swedish military.  He has never sought to hold political office in
Sweden or used his Swedish citizenship to protect his financial or business interests.  
Furthermore, Applicant’s financial interest in his Swedish pension account is still quite
minimal (around $160.00) when compared with her U.S. based portfolio and overall net worth
(in excess of $75,000.00)  As a result of this agreement’s neutralizing of any country
advantage in collecting old age pension benefits derived from either country, Applicant’s
Swedish old age pension rights became security insignificant and were properly deleted by
Department Counsel as a source of security concern at the close of the hearing.  
By relinquishing his Swedish passport, Applicant has complied with the mitigation
requirements of MC ¶ 11 (e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” of AG ¶ 18.  And while his surrendering his
Swedish passport to his FSO does not automatically mitigate any past use of the passport to
enter and exit European countries, his recited limited use of the passport is insufficient by
itself to demonstrate Applicant’s preference for Sweden over the U.S.
Failure to satisfy a mitigating condition may be taken into account when assessing an
applicant’s overall claim of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances, but may not be
turned into a disqualifying condition.  See ISCR Case No. 01-02270 (Appeal Bd. Aug. 29,
2003).  That Applicant may wish to keep his Swedish citizenship out of respect for his mother
is not sufficient reason either to preclude him from mitigating security concerns over his
holding dual citizenship and a small Swedish pension, if those rights do not entail his exacting
preferential retirement privileges from Sweden.  
Whole person precepts favor Applicant’s preference for the U.S. over Sweden.  He is a
U.S. citizen by birth and has always demonstrated his loyalty for the U.S.  His principal
financial interests are situated in the U.S.  And his time spent in Sweden was relatively brief
and devoted to his educational pursuits.  
Overall, Applicant persuades that his preference is with the U.S.  He satisfies his proof
burden in several ways: demonstrated lack of any prior exercise of any privileges associated
with his Swedish citizenship, save for his limited use of his Swedish passport and maintaining
a small bank account in Sweden. Applicant absolves himself of foreign preference concerns
7
and carries his evidentiary burden on the presented issue of whether his preference lies with
his native country (U.S.) or the country (Sweden) where he was naturalized as a minor
through his mother’s Swedish citizenship.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g of Guideline C.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of
the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of
the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate formal
findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a : FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: FOR APPLICANT
 CONCLUSIONS
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
8
