                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01158
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 4, 2008, and elected to have her case
decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on May 15, 2008.  Applicant did not submit any information in
response to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me July 21, 2008.
2
Procedural Issues
Department Counsel requests that official notice be taken of the Equifax Training
Brochure (ex. 15) included in the FORM.  There being no objections from Applicant, and
good cause being shown, Department Counsel’s request is granted.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) petitioned for Chapter 13
bankruptcy relief in September 2006 (dismissed in December 2006), (b) petitioned for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in November 2006 (dismissed in January 2007, ©)
petitioned for Chapter 13 relief in February 2007 (dismissed in April 2007), and (d)
incurred five delinquent debts exceeding $120,000.00. These allegations are framed by
subparagraphs 1.b through1.I (subparagraph 1.a is missing).  For her answer to the
SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations without explanation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old associate for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married her first husband (H1) in September 1992 (see ex. 6). She and
H1 filed for divorce in December 1996 (finalized in September 1998).  Applicant and H
continued to cohabit after they determined to file for divorce.  They needed their joint
income to cover their mortgage and continued to live in their home while they
endeavored to sell it (see ex. 6).  Their home was appraised at the time at $40,000.00
below the balance owed on their mortgage (about $101,000.00).  Because their lender
would not approve a short sale, they could not avert a default on their mortgage.  Their
mortgage, in turn, was foreclosed in April 1997.  At public auction in July 1997, their
property was sold for more than the loan value of the property (leaving no potential
deficiency balance).  After the foreclosure, Applicant and H1 moved into a townhouse to
be closer to their respective jobs (ex. 6).  Applicant vacated the townhouse in October
1997 (see ex. 6).
 Applicant’s divorce decree with H1 provided for each spouse to take full
responsibility for their respective car payments (see ex. 6). When H1's car was later
repossessed, Applicant agreed to repay one-half of the deficiency balance (estimated to
be $6,950.00) and satisfied her share of the debt. H1 never paid his share of the
remaining debt, according to Applicant,  and the lender, in turn, looked to Applicant for
the deficiency (see ex. 6).
Applicant remarried in February 2004 (ex. 4).  In October 2007.  Applicant and
her husband (H2) have no children from this marriage. 
3
Experiencing unemployment and associated income shortages, Appellant
petitioned for Chapter 13 relief on four separate occasions between April 2006 and
February 2007 (see exs. 11 and 13).  Before filing her first petition, Applicant sought
and obtained financial counseling (see ex. 8).  Appellant’s bankruptcy schedules report
$27,835.00 in personal property and $340,397.00 in real property.  Reported liabilities
include $37,653.00 in secured claims and $5,952.00 in unsecured claims (see ex. 7).
Each of her Chapter 13 petitions was dismissed.  
Applicant’s credit reports lists each of the dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy
filings and delinquent debts covered in the SOR (see exs. 11, 12 and 13).  Her credit
reports include a fourth Chapter 13 petition (filed in April 2006 and dismissed in August
2006) that was not listed in the SOR. 
Applicant provided no documentation in her behalf to support any further
progress in the resolution of her debts.  She provided no endorsements or performance
evaluations.  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18.
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Following their divorce in 1996, Applicant and her husband encountered financial
setbacks that resulted in the foreclosure of their home, repossession of her husband’s
vehicle, defaults in their other debts, and a series of unsuccessful Chapter 13 petitions
(four in all between April 2006 and February 2007).  Applicant has not provided any
documentation of her repayment efforts. Absent documented discharge or payment
initiatives with her listed creditors,  these debts raise security significant concerns.
Applicant’s finances
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual appellant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide
by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the person at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts and her inability to successfully address them warrants the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for financial considerations:
DC  ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not
5
meeting financial obligations.”  These disqualifying conditions cover the core concern of
AG ¶ 18: poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, which, both individually and collectively, can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to safely occupy a position of trust.  
Applicant’s accumulated debts are attributable in part to set backs associated with
her divorce, foreclosure of her home, unemployment and other considerations not
explained.  Based on her very limited accounts of her financial set backs, partial
application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” is warranted here.  
At this time, none of Applicant’s covered debts are documented to have been
paid, disputed, or settled.  They exceed $120,000.00 in the aggregate and represent a
considerable debt load based on her current income sources.  While her financial
counseling and unsuccessful Chapter 13 efforts represent some positive steps to resolve
her financial difficulties, she provides no evidence of any follow-through in addressing
her outstanding debts.  Her dismissed petitions and still unsatisfied debts preclude the
assignment of any significant mitigation weight to her efforts to date. 
Without more documented information to demonstrate Applicant is addressing her
significant debt accumulation, she cannot mitigate the Government’s financial concerns.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities,
which include the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial stability in a
person cleared for access to classified information is required precisely to inspire trust
and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance
holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence,
judgment and trust concerns are important concerns as well.
Use of a whole person assessment that takes into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt repayment efforts is insufficient to enable
her to surmount security concerns independent of the express disqualifying conditions
covered by AG ¶ 18.  Without more exhibited repayment and work-out efforts to
demonstrate progress in resolving her debts, it is difficult to draw convincing conclusions
about her overall trustworthiness based on factors not covered in the mitigation
conditions of the guideline for financial considerations. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance of
a “meaningful track record” in the management of an applicant’s finances, which
certainly includes evidence of actual debt reduction through repayments. See ISCR
Case No. 05-01920, at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007).  True, an applicant’s good-faith debt
repayment does not require that she demonstrate repayment of each and every listed
debt.  All that is required is that the applicant demonstrate that she developed a plan to
resolve her debts and taken significant actions to implement the plan.  See ISCR Case
6
No. 07-16013, at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-09684, at 2 (App. Bd.
July 6, 2006). 
Applicant fails to meet  Appeal Board requirements for repayment progress with
her listed creditors.  Absent some tangible form of payments and/or repayment plans on
her listed debts, safe predictive judgments about her finances cannot be made at this
time.
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
unsatisfied debts and overall presentation of payment histories, Applicant does not
mitigate security concerns related to her still outstanding debts.  Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.b through1.i.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT    
Sub-paras. 1.b through 1.I: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
