                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04777 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s Father,1 Personal Representative 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline H (drug 
involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1 Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to personal privacy. 
Specific information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
2Government Exhibit (GE) 4 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated May 27, 2008). GE 4 is the 
source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his security clearance, and recommended referral 
to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 16, 2008, and elected to 
have his case decided after a hearing. At the hearing held on August 25, 2008, 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GEs 1 and 2), and Applicant offered four 
exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-D). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1, 
2 and AE A-D (transcript (Tr.) 26, 30, 49). I approved a delay until September 5, 2008, 
to permit Applicant to submit additional documents (Tr. 85-86). On September 3, 2008, I 
received AE E. Department Counsel did not object, and I admitted AE E. I received the 
transcript on September 8, 2008.   
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of the SOR’s allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant became 23 years old in August 2008.5 He graduated from high school 
in June 2003 and from college in May 2007 with a bachelors degree. From December 
2007 to present, a government contractor has employed him as an associate, while he 
learns the technical aspects of being an analyst. An analyst repeatedly runs computer 
programs, and records the results (Tr. 50). From September 2007 to December 2007, 
he was employed at a shop as an assistant manager. He has no military service. He 
has never married. He is currently enrolled in graduate school, and his first class begins 
in late August 2008 (Tr. 27, 62; AE A). Applicant was a varsity soccer player in college 
and continues to play soccer in a club (Tr. 62-63).       
 
Drug Involvement (Guideline H) 
 
On his December 19, 2007, security clearance application, Applicant estimated 
he used marijuana more than 300 times between December 2001 and August 2007, a 
3On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
4Ex. GE 2 (Responses to Interrogatories) and 5 (Response to SOR) are the sources for the facts 
in this section unless stated otherwise.   
  
5GE 1 (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated Dec. 19, 2007, will 
be referred to as a security clearance application in this decision) is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph, and the next paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
six year period (SOR ¶ 1.a) (Tr. 75). He sometimes provided marijuana to others (Tr. 
77). He also admitted using prescription drugs Aderol, Morphine and Vicodin seven 
times between August 2003 and August 2007 without having a prescription (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
He used cocaine ten times between December 2004 and June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d). He 
used psilocybin or psilocin (hallucinogenic mushrooms) four times between November 
2006 and June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.e) (Tr. 75-76). He used opium once between November 
2005 and December 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
When Applicant played soccer for his college during the fall season, he did not 
use drugs because of the NCAA drug testing program (Tr. 63-64). However, he used 
drugs during the off season mostly out of boredom and peer pressure (Tr. 65-66, 71-
72). He also knew the NCAA did not test during the off season (Tr. 65-66). When he 
used illegal drugs, he did not believe he would be caught by law enforcement (Tr. 72). 
He is able to abstain from drug use while employed by the government contractor 
because he knows about the employer’s random drug-testing policy (Tr. 64). He does 
not want to disappoint his parents (Tr. 73). He recognized that drug use was selfish and 
narcissistic (Tr. 74). 
 
Applicant’s interim security clearance was denied in December 2007 (Tr. 59). 
Applicant understands the responsibilities and commitment related to holding a 
clearance because his father has held a clearance for years (Tr. 60). He believes he is 
ready to hold a clearance (Tr. 60). Applicant does not physically associate with drug 
users, but he still has some internet communication with drug users that he met in 
college (Tr. 57-58). For example, he expects to receive some e-mail greetings from drug 
users that he associated with in college (Tr. 58). Although some of his associates visited 
for a reunion a few weeks before his hearing, drugs were not used at the reunion (Tr. 
67). He used marijuana in high school, and now lives in the vicinity of his high school 
(Tr. 69). He rarely sees anyone he knows from high school (Tr. 69). Because he 
associates with numerous soccer players, it is likely that he associates with drug users 
(Tr. 70-71). If he observed drugs being used, he would just leave the area (Tr. 67-68). 
He was candid and honest about his past drug use (Tr. 61). His last drug use was in 
August 2007 (Tr. 68). He disclosed his drug abuse to his parents (Tr. 74). 
  
Applicant’s sister is 25 (Tr. 33). She opined that Applicant has integrity, honor 
and displayed candor during the clearance process (Tr. 33). She concluded with respect 
to these attributes that he was exceptional for a 23-year-old (Tr. 33). Applicant has 
separated himself from his drug-using associates, who attended college with him 
hundreds of miles from where he currently lives (Tr. 36). She believed the last time he 
used illegal drugs was in August 2007, when friends from college visited him (Tr. 37).  
 
Applicant’s father did not dispute the SOR’s allegations of drug use (Tr. 82-83). 
He emphasized that the only source of drug information was Applicant’s disclosure, and 
that Applicant had shown candor and honesty (Tr. 82). Applicant was not caught using 
drugs. He emphasized Applicant’s trustworthiness (Tr. 82). There was no diagnosis of 
drug use, or recommendation to attend a rehabilitation program (Tr. 83).   
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Since November 2007, Applicant’s sponsor at the government contractor 
observes him at work on a daily basis (Tr. 39, 41). Applicant is hardworking, 
enthusiastic and learns quickly (AE B). Applicant shows attention to detail and is very 
conscientious (AE B). She believes Applicant is honest and trustworthy (Tr. 40). 
Applicant’s drug use in college did not cause her to doubt his current reliability or 
trustworthiness (Tr. 44, 45). She wrote a letter of recommendation dated June 10, 2008, 
on his behalf (AE B; Tr. 42).  
 
Applicant’s supervisor at the government contactor, Mr. B, has supervised him 
since December 2007 (Tr. 47). Applicant does not currently have a security clearance 
(Tr. 56). Mr. B’s office is adjacent to Applicant’s office (Tr. 51). Mr. B has worked for the 
contractor more than 29 years, and has held a Top Secret clearance for most of those 
29 years (Tr. 50, 52). Applicant exceeded nearly all of Mr. B’s expectations (AE C). He 
learns quickly and is goal oriented (AE C). Applicant’s drug use was a concern that 
warranted observation (Tr. 53). Mr. B believes Applicant had terminated his drug use 
(Tr. 55). Applicant’s employer drug tests employees before they are hired, and 
thereafter they are randomly drug tested (Tr. 54). There is zero tolerance for drug use 
and the result of drug use is usually immediate dismissal (Tr. 54). Mr. B verified the 
accuracy of Applicant’s performance appraisal (Tr. 48-49; AE C). Applicant is 
trustworthy (Tr. 51). 
   
Department Counsel conceded that Applicant’s statement concerning automatic 
revocation of his clearance if he used illegal drugs was adequate the meet the 
requirements of revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) ¶ 26(b)(4) (Tr. 78, 81; AE D), 
discussed infra. 
 
On August 28, 2008, the President of Applicant’s company, provided a letter 
stating at Applicant’s request, the company would “facilitate random monthly drug 
testing for a period of twelve months” (AE E). 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
 
 
6See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
7“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Drug Involvement (Guideline H) 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug8 involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse”9 and “illegal drug possession, 
including . . .  purchase, sale or distribution [of illegal drugs]. . . .” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). 
The other six disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. These two 
disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used and possessed marijuana, 
cocaine, psilocybin or psilocin (hallucinogenic mushrooms), and opium. He also used 
Aderol, Morphine and Vicodin without a prescription.   
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation. AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
8AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substances. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 
545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). Mushrooms are the street name for 
psilocybin or psilocin, which is a Schedule (Sch.) I Controlled Substance. See United States v. Hussein, 
351 F.3d 9, 16 (1st Cir. 2003) (mushrooms are a plant which may contain the Schedule I(c)(15) and 
I(c)(16) controlled substance psilocybin or psilocyn). Opium and cocaine are Schedule II Controlled 
Substances. See Sch. II(a)(3) (opium); and Sch. II(a)(4) (cocaine).   
 
9 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”  ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”10 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
Although Applicant’s last drug use was slightly more than a year ago, AG ¶ 26(a) 
fully applies despite Applicant’s last illegal drug use being relatively recent. His overall 
illegal drug use lasted approximately six years, and involved numerous uses of 
marijuana, and other illegal drugs.11 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because his drug use does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I am confident 
because of his previous demonstration that he could abstain from drug use and his 
company’s random drug testing policy that his illegal drug possession and use will not 
recur. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the future, his current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment is restored.   
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has essentially disassociated from drug-using associates 
and contacts. He moved hundreds of miles from the location where he routinely abused 
illegal drugs, changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used. He 
abstained from drug abuse for slightly more than one year. He provided “a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”  AG ¶ 26(b) 
applies.  
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because his drug abuse did not follow an illness, and 
these illegal drugs were never prescribed for him. AG ¶ 26(d) is not applicable because 
he has not completed a prescribed drug treatment program, and there has not been a 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in August 2007. The motivations to 
stop using drugs are evident.12 He understands he will be terminated from his 
employment if he abuses drugs, and his company is going to randomly test him on a 
monthly basis for a year. He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no 
drug abuse to warrant access to classified information.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an Administrative Judge stating: 
 
The Administrative Judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times 
a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the 
illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
11In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the Administrative Judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse.  
 
12Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free.  
  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.13     
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is significant. Applicant 
estimated his marijuana use at more than 300 times between December 2001 and 
August 2007, a six year period. Sometimes he provided marijuana to others. He used 
Aderol, Morphine and Vicodin seven times between August 2003 and August 2007 
without a prescription. He used cocaine ten times between December 2004 and June 
2007. He used psilocybin or psilocin (hallucinogenic mushrooms) four times between 
November 2006 and June 2007. He used opium once between November 2005 and 
December 2005. He has not completely cut off his contacts with individuals who use 
illegal drugs. His drug uses were knowledgeable, voluntary, and not isolated. He is 
sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. Drug use is not prudent or 
responsible. He did not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have a clear 
understanding about how to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in the 
misconduct.  
 
The evidence supporting approval of his clearance is more substantial. Applicant 
revealed his drug abuse on his security clearance application. The only evidence of his 
drug problem came from his admissions. I specifically find his statements about his drug 
use and his changes in his drug-abusing behavior are credible. Applicant was young 
when he used illegal drugs, and was not yet 23 at the time of his hearing. He used 
drugs because of boredom and peer pressure. He no longer has direct physical 
association with his drug-abusing peers, and if someone starts to use drugs in his 
presence he will leave the area. He was a student when he used drugs. Now he is in 
the workforce where the consequences of drug abuse will be much more severe. He 
13 Although I find Applicant’s drug abuse mitigated under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b), even if neither of 
these mitigating conditions fully applied, I would still mitigate the security concerns under the whole 
person concept.  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
stopped using illegal drugs slightly more than a year ago. He knows if he uses drugs he 
will be terminated from his employment and lose his security clearance. Especially 
important is the employer’s promise to randomly test him on a monthly basis for a year 
to verify his abstinence. Future drug use, especially after his clearance is approved, will 
severely damage his career. Applicant has begun graduate school, and is a valued 
employee with excellent potential. There is no evidence at work of any disciplinary 
problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate 
national security. His law-abiding character and good work performance shows some 
responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His family, a co-worker, and his supervisor 
supported approval of his clearance. I am satisfied that his current judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and his current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations warrant a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”14 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
14See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
