1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02197
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On May 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
H, Drug Involvement, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2008, admitted all of the allegations,
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2008. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on July 23, 2008 scheduling it for August 18, 2008. During the
hearing, I received three government exhibits and Applicant’s testimony. At Applicant’s
request, I left the record open at the close of the hearing to allow him to submit exhibits.
Applicant timely submitted nine exhibits (A-I) that I incorporated into the record. DOHA
She does not know about his past use.1
2
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2008. Based on a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old, married man with a 14-year-old child, and two, five-
year-old twin children. He has been married since 1992.
Applicant graduated from college in 1995 with a bachelor’s degree in science and
architecture (Exhibit 1). Since 2000, he has worked for an architecture firm. According
to his supervisor, he is a “hard-working, detail-oriented individual who continues to take
on assignments of increasing responsibility with great success” (Exhibit A).
Applicant has been smoking marijuana for nearly 28 years. He began at age 16
and smoked it daily through age 28 (Tr. 21). After getting married, his use decreased to
two to three times per year (Exhibit 1 at 29). On these occasions, he smokes it with
friends who bring it with them when they visit his home (Tr. 19). 
On December 11, 2007, approximately a month after Applicant completed a
security clearance application, he was interviewed by a security clearance investigator.
When asked about his marijuana consumption, he stated that he had no intention of
using it again, but would probably smoke some if his friends brought some to his home
(Answer).
Three weeks later, on New Year’s Eve, Applicant’s friends visited him, brought
some marijuana, and Applicant sampled some of it (Id.). He then resolved to quit using
marijuana. He has made similar resolutions five times before (Tr. 23). Applicant
attributes his continued marijuana use to peer pressure (Tr. 34). 
Applicant has not used marijuana since December 2007, and does not intend to
use it again. His wife never approved of his past use, and he wants to set a good
example for his daughter, who is now a teenager.  He is now more conscientious about1
the risks to his career that continued use could pose.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
3
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s 28-year history of
marijuana, spanning from his teenage years to December 2007, three weeks after he
was interviewed by a security clearance investigator, triggers the application of AG ¶¶
25(a), any drug abuse, 25( c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and
25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.”
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant,
a 43-year-old man, attributed his continued use into middle-age to peer pressure,
something normally a problem for teenagers. His last episode of marijuana use
corresponded with a vow to quit, but he has made similar vows in the past. Also, it
occurred less than a month after he met with a security clearance investigator. Given
the length of time that he abused marijuana in the past, the recency of his last use, and
his nonchalant attitude he held as recently as November 2007 about the seriousness of
marijuana use, it remains a security concern.
Personal Conduct
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information (AG ¶
15). Specifically, Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(e), “personal
4
conduct  . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal,
professional, or community standing . . . “ None of the mitigating conditions apply for the
same reasons set forth in the Drug Involvement section of the Decision, above.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.”
Applicant deserves credit for disclosing the extent of his marijuana use. He is
committed to his job. These positive attributes are outweighed by the frequency and
extent of his past marijuana use. After evaluating this case in the context of the whole
person concept, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
