                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00177 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1972 until early 2007, using it during the last 20 
years a few times a year. Applicant has not rebutted or mitigated the government’s 
security concerns under guideline H, drug involvement. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 25, 2008, detailing security concerns under drug 
involvement.  
  
 On July 8, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 7, 2008. The FORM contained 
attachments Items 1-5. In an undated letter, Applicant responded to the FORM. 
Department Counsel did not object to the material. Applicant's response was admitted 
into the record. On September 15, 2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.e. of the SOR. He admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c of the SOR. 
Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old satellite engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. In 1973, 
Applicant was granted a secret clearance and in 1984, he obtained a top secret 
clearance. No information about his duty performance has been presented. Applicant 
stated, but failed to document, he had many letters of commendation. (Applicant’s 
Answer to FORM)  
 
 In his November 2006 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), in response to question 24, the use of illegal drugs and drug activity, Applicant 
states he used marijuana “100+” times between January 1972 and the present. He 
stated within the last 20 years he was present when marijuana was being smoked and 
he would occasionally take a puff and inhale. (Item 4) 
 
 In June 1974, Applicant was a member of the U.S. Navy when charged with sale 
of marijuana, a felony, and convicted of possession of marijuana. He was fined and 
received probation. In June 1976, he was honorably discharged from the Navy. (Item 4) 
In a February 2007-personal subject interview (Item 5), Applicant admitted he used 
marijuana on occasion. His last use was in January 2007 or February 2007 with old 
friends at a funeral. (Item 5) Applicant first used marijuana in the 1970’s. During the last 
20 years, he has used marijuana once or twice a year, when available, in a safe place, 
and among friends.  
 
 Applicant stated he did not plan to use marijuana in the future, but did state he 
would smoke it again if offered. In his response to the SOR (Item 2), Applicant states he 
is not a security risk, his use of marijuana was “a couple of puffs here,” and, except for 
the 1974 incident while he was in the Navy, never used while possessing a security 
clearance. In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated he never smoked “while on 
assignment CONUS nor OCONUS.”  
 
 
 
 
3
The National Defense Authorization Act for the Fiscal Year 2008, Public Law 110 
-181, codified in 50 U.S.C. § 435c, states: “After January 1, 2008, the head of a Federal 
agency may not grant or renew a security clearance for a covered person who is an 
unlawful user of a controlled substance or an addict” as defined by federal law.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program; 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by a duly 
qualified medical professional; 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
From the 1972 until early 2007, Applicant used marijuana in excess of 100 times, 
using it once or twice a year during the past 20 years. He last smoked marijuana in 
January 2007 or February 2007, while with old friends attending a funeral. This last use 
occurred after he had completed his November 2006-e-QIP and was seeking a 
clearance. At the time of his 1974 arrest and conviction, Applicant was a member of the 
U.S. Navy and held a secret clearance. In November 2006, when asked if he would 
smoke marijuana in the future, Applicant stated he would use if offered marijuana and 
the occasion conducive. AG ¶ 25a, 25c, 25g, and 25h apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
 
5
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during 
which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and, 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but 
not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, 
and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e charge Applicant used marijuana when he held a security 
clearance. In 1973 and 1984, Applicant was granted security clearances. He used 
marijuana from 1972 until early 2007. However, there is no evidence, except for the 
1974-incident, that his use occurred while he held a clearance. In 1974, he held a secret 
clearance when he was arrested for the sale of marijuana and convicted of possessing 
marijuana. The 1974 incident was more than 30 years ago and, as such, the passage of 
time lessens the security significance of this event.  
 
Applicant has denied using while holding a clearance. The government 
presented no evidence refuting his denial. Applicant also denied using while on 
assignment. The disqualifying condition of using illegal drugs while holding a clearance 
makes no distinction between using at work or while off-duty. Illegal drug use is illegal 
drug use no matter where it occurs. The issue is whether or not Applicant held a 
clearance while using and the record fails to establish he had a clearance when he 
used. I find for Applicant as to SOR ¶¶ 1. d and 1.e. 
  
 None of the mitigating factors apply to Applicant’s use of illegal drugs. AG ¶ 26a 
does not apply because the behavior did not happen long ago. His last use was less 
than two years ago. He used it in excess of 100 times so his use was not infrequent. 
There is no evidence his use occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur or 
do not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. He last used with old friends at a funeral. Seeing old friends at a funeral is 
likely to recur.  
 
AG ¶ 26b does not apply because there is no demonstrated intent not to abuse 
drugs in the future. Applicant states he will not use marijuana in the future, unless it was 
offered to him and the occasion conducive. There is no showing of a disassociation 
from drug-using associates or contacts or a changing or avoiding the environment 
where drugs were used. Nor the period of abstinence, which is slightly more than a year 
and a half, an appropriate period of abstinence when balanced against his use over a 
35 year period.  
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 26c does not apply because use of prescription drugs was not an issue. AG 
¶ 26d does not apply because there was no satisfactory completion of a drug treatment 
program.  
 
Applicant’s last marijuana use occurred in early 2007, which was after he had 
completed his November 2006-e-QIP. Even though he was seeking a clearance, he 
lacked the knowledge that his illegal use marijuana was inappropriate and incompatible 
with holding a clearance. During the 35-year period from the 1970’s through early 2007, 
Applicant lacked either the knowledge that using marijuana was wrong or the fortitude 
not to use. Either way, he fails to display the reliability and trustworthiness necessary to 
obtain access to our country’s secrets. His continued marijuana use over a 35-year 
period raises questions about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.  
 
Under the National Defense Authorization Act for the Fiscal Year 2008, Public 
Law 110-181, codified in 50 U.S.C. § 435c, an unlawful user of marijuana may not be 
granted a security clearance. 50 U.S.C. § 435c(b) uses the present tense, making it 
applicable only if the person “is” an unlawful user or “is” an addict. See ISCR Case No. 
03-25009 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2005). Based on the evidence, I conclude Applicant is 
disqualified as an unlawful user of marijuana. He has used it for most of his adult life. 
He stated he would smoke marijuana if offered to him and the occasion conducive, 
making it likely he will continue to use it. I am satisfied Applicant is a present user of 
marijuana within the meaning of 50 U.S.C. § 435c. Applicant is disqualified from being 
granted a clearance.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 
 
 
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In 1974, Applicant, while a member 
of the U.S. Navy, was arrested and found guilty of marijuana possession. Had his 
marijuana use ended there, this incident would not be a security concern. However, his 
use continued for the next 33 years. For the past twenty years he has been using 
marijuana once or twice a year. When asked if he would use in the future, he said he 
would if it were offered and the occasion conducive. Applicant still fails to understand 
his use of marijuana is illegal, inappropriate, and incompatible with holding a clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
