                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01524
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On April 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 4, 2008, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on July 1, 2008.  Applicant did not submit any information in response
to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me September 15, 2008.
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested (a) on four different
occasions between June 2003 and January 2007 on various charges related to
domestic violence, (b) once in February 2004 for no insurance (followed by the issuance
of a warrant for failure to appear) and (c) once for possession of alcohol by a minor in
May 2006.
Under both Guidelines E and J, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his public
trust application (SF-85P) of April 2007 and his security clearance application (SF-86) of
July 2007, by omitting the arrests covered in the SOR.
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations pertaining
to his arrests anc associated charges with explanations.  He denied that a warrant was
issued in connection with his 2004 arrest.  He claimed three of the charges were either
dismissed or dropped (viz., subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d and 1.f). He never admitted nor
denied the allegations concerning his omissions of his arrests.  He did, however, claim
that he was told (source not identified) that all of the alleged charges would be
dismissed and not show up on his record, and for this reason, he did not list them in his
SF-86.  Applicant’s explanations essentially deny any intentional omission, and will be
treated as pleading denials.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 22-year-old lawn seasonal maintenance worker for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional
findings follow.
Applicant was arrested on a number of occasions between June 2003 and
January 2007 for assorted offenses.  Records show that he was arrested in June 2003
and charged with simple assault/family violence and criminal trespassing.  He was
placed on pre-trial diversion and the charges were nolle prosequi in February 2006.  He
was arrested for no insurance in February 2004.  When he did not appear as scheduled,
a bench warrant reportedly was issued.  When Applicant appeared for his hearing, he
was issued a warning. 
Between May 2005 and January 2007, he was arrested on three occasions for
domestic violence offenses and charged with battery/family violence.  Charges were
dismissed relative to both of his May 2005 domestic violence arrests.  He was found
guilty of battery/family violence relative to his January 2007 charges and fined
approximately $400.00. He claims the charges were dismissed following his completion
of an anger management course, but provides no documentation of the same.  
Applicant’s other arrest was alcohol-related.  Records show that in May 2006, he
was cited and charged with possession of alcohol by a minor.  He was found guilty and
3
fined approximately $480.00.  Applicant claims he does not drink anymore, but provides
no witness or documentary support for his claims.
When interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in September 2007, Applicant described the covered domestic violence incidents
as essentially quarrels that ended in some pushing and physical damage of his
girlfriend’s apartment (see Item 6).   With respect to his May 2006 arrest, he recalled
spending a night in jail and completing  in some cases and completing the work required
by the court (item 6).  Applicant provides no further details of any of the covered
incidents in the SOR. 
Asked to complete an SF-85P in April 2007, and an SF-86 in July 2007, Applicant
omitted all of his arrests covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f.  He attributed his
omissions of his 2003 and 2004 arrests to his claimed belief that he did not have to list
arrests that occurred when he was a minor.  He attributed his alcohol-related arrest to
memory lapse.  And he attributed his omissions of his 2005 and 2007 domestic violence
arrests to his belief that the charges stemming from these arrests were either dropped
or dismissed, and hence did not need to be listed (see Answer and Item 6).  Applicant ‘s
explanations do not provide a very credible explanation in their entirety.  His
explanations at the very least require more detail to be plausible. 
Considering all of the circumstances of Applicant’s omissions, his claims of
misunderstanding and inadvertent omission cannot be accepted as plausible and
credible explanations. Inferences warrant that Applicant’s omissions were made
deliberately with the intent to mislead the Government.  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
4
Criminal Conduct 
 The Concern.  Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 30.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
5
Analysis  
Applicant in this case was arrested and/or cited on six difference occasions over a
four-year period spanning 2003 and 2007 for assorted offenses ranging from driving
without proof of insurance and failing to appear, possessing alcohol as a minor, and
domestic violence offenses (four in all).  He is also alleged to have committed criminal
conduct in omitting his arrest/charges from both the SF-85P and SF-86 he completed in
2007. Applicant’s arrests/charges and omissions are probative based on the information
presented in this record raise initial security concerns.  
Appellant’s admitted charges (some later dropped or dismissed) warrant
consideration under the criminal conduct guideline (¶ 30) of the AGs.  DC ¶ 31(a), “a
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,”
have application.
While some of the covered charges may have been dropped or dismissed, they
entail admitted criminal conduct that is neither aged nor isolated.  His conduct is too
recent and frequent to warrant application of any of the mitigating conditions of the
criminal conduct guideline. He provides no documentation either of character
endorsements, work evaluations, or demonstrated work in the community that might aid
in making a positive whole person assessment.  
Use of a whole person assessment that takes into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s arrest history is insufficient to enable him to
surmount security concerns independent of the express disqualifying conditions covered
by AG ¶ 18.  Without proof of acquired maturity and a demonstrated change of direction
in his life, it is difficult to draw convincing conclusions about his overall trustworthiness
based on factors not covered in the mitigation conditions of the guideline for financial
considerations. 
Based on a consideration of the applicable guidelines and a limited  whole person
assessment from the few details furnished by Applicant, unfavorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by the criminal conduct guideline. 
Potentially serious, too, and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s assorted arrests/charges in the SF-85P and SF-86 he completed in April and
July 2007, respectively, and withholding the information until he was confronted in his
ensuing OPM interview.  So much trust is imposed on persons cleared to see classified
information that deviation tolerances for candor lapses are gauged very narrowly. 
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with, since he failed to promptly correct his
SF-86 understatements before being confronted in his ensuing OPM interview.  In the
past, the Appeal Board has denied applicants availability of the predecessor mitigating
condition of MC 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the
6
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) where the
applicant has waited many months to timely correct a known omission. Compare ISCR
Case No. 97-0289 (Appeal Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (Appeal
Bd. January 1995).
By omitting his arrests/charges in both his SF-85P and SF-86, Applicant
concealed materially important background information needed for the government to
properly process and evaluate his security clearance application.  His attributed reasons
for his omissions (minor status, memory lapse, and impression that dropped or
dismissed charges need no be listed) are not sustainable grounds for averting inferences
of falsification.  Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his SF-86 arrest/charge
omissions and lack of any prompt, good faith corrections, Applicant’s claims lack the
necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he knowingly and
deliberately withheld material background information about his prior use of illegal
substances. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b.  Because Applicant’s omissions are isolated and were
followed by corrections when interviewed two months later, criminal conduct associated
with them are mitigated.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT    
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.f: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para.  1.g: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 2.a and 2.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
