 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02542 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol Consumption security concerns raised by 
his three alcohol-related arrests. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on July 30, 2008. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
 
2 
 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 6, 2008. He responded with a letter 
dated August 20, 2008. Department Counsel did not object to his response. I have 
marked Applicant’s response as Exhibit (Ex.) A, and it is admitted. I received the case 
assignment on September 10, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a college 
graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree. He was a student ambassador, the highest 
non-academic honor awarded at his university. He received the university’s leadership 
award on three occasions. He is single with no children.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2002, when he was 19 years old, and charged 
with minor in possession of an alcoholic beverage. He pled guilty and was sentenced to 
pay fines and costs of about $250, and to attend a class on alcohol use. He satisfied all 
the requirements of his sentence.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2006, for driving under the influence (DUI). He 
drank about six beers and three shots of alcohol before he drove the car. He was 
stopped at a DUI checkpoint. The police officer noticed a strong odor of alcohol. He had 
red glassy eyes, slurred speech, and appeared drunk. He did not perform well on the 
field sobriety test. He refused the breathalyzer test. Applicant pled guilty to reckless 
driving. He was sentenced to pay fines and costs of about $300, and his license was 
revoked for three months.3  
 
 Applicant again drove after drinking beer on an evening in February 2007. He 
admitted to drinking about seven beers. He was stopped at about 1:30 in the morning 
for not stopping at a stop sign. He was arrested and charged with DUI. His prosecution 
was deferred for one year until August 20, 2008, at which time with good behavior, the 
charge would be dismissed. He was required to pay court costs, attend a victim impact 
panel, and his license was suspended for three months. There was no evidence to 
suggest that Applicant did not comply with the terms of his deferred prosecution.4 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol in about 1999, when he was 16 years old. He 
believes he is intoxicated after about four to five drinks. He estimated in January 2008, 
that he drank to intoxication about six times a year. He recently reported that he no 
longer drinks to the point of intoxication. He does not believe he has a drinking problem 
and has not received any alcohol counseling or treatment. He credits the rehabilitative 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 4. 
 
2 Items 1, 4, 5. 
 
3 Items 1, 4-6. 
 
4 Items 1, 4, 5, 7. 
 
 
3 
 
influence of his church and faith in assisting him in abstaining from his problem 
behavior.5 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
                                                          
5 Items 4, 5; Ex. A. 
 
 
4 
 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 22(a). There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his drinking habits constituted “habitual or binge” 
drinking. AG ¶ 22(c) is not applicable.  
 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2002, for minor in possession of an alcoholic beverage. 
He had a DUI in July 2006, that was reduced upon a plea to a reckless driving charge. 
He had another DUI in February 2007. He has not received alcohol counseling or 
treatment, but credits the rehabilitative influence of his church and faith. He indicated 
that he no longer drinks to intoxication. That is positive information. However, Applicant 
does not have a sufficient track record without an alcohol-related incident to reap the full 
benefit of any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant received numerous honors 
in college. He has three alcohol-related arrests, including a DUI arrest in July 2006, and 
another one seven months later in February 2007. Applicant has not gone long enough 
without an alcohol-related incident for a determination that he has eliminated alcohol as 
a problem.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Alcohol Consumption security concerns.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
