 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-01204 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Foreign Preference 
and Foreign Influence. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 14, 2006. On April 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 24, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR on April 25, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 30, 2008, and I received 
the case assignment on June 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 4, 
2008, scheduling the case for July 2, 2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
received without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, and testified on his own 
behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 14, 2008.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (Exhibit (Ex.) 
I(A)), requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts contained in 
Ex. I(A) as well as those facts in Exs. I through X. Without objection from Applicant, I 
took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department Counsel, which 
pertain to Lebanon. (Tr. 18-20).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Lebanon were derived from Exs. I(A), and I through X, are contained infra under the 
subheading “Lebanon” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old junior accountant/analyst, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since June 2004. Tr. 26-27. He is a first time applicant for a 
security clearance and is applying for a clearance as an employment requirement. Tr. 
86-88.  
 
Applicant was born in February 1967 in Sierra Leone to Lebanese parents. As 
such, he derived his Lebanese citizenship from his parents. GE 1. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) Until 
Applicant immigrated to the U.S. in 1986, he lived in Sierra Leone and Lebanon. In 
August 1986 at age 19, he immigrated to the U.S. to attend school and has continuously 
 3
lived in the U.S. since then. Tr. 29-36. From November 1987 to October 1991, Applicant 
was married to his first wife, a U.S. citizen by birth. That marriage ended by divorce. In 
January 1992, he married his second and current wife, also a U.S. citizen by birth. 
Applicant and his wife have three sons, ages ten, eight, and seven. GE 1. His wife is 
employed as a pharmacist technician. Tr. 78-79. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in March 1997, and was issued his U.S. passport in May 1998. GE 1, Tr. 36-38. 
He was awarded a bachelor of science in business administration with an emphasis in 
accounting in December 2001. GE 1, Tr. 25-26. 
 
In addition to his wife and three sons, Applicant has three family members living 
in the U.S., his mother, two sisters, and a half brother. His mother was born in Lebanon 
in June 1948 and is 60 years old. His first sister was born in Sierra Leone in June 1968 
and is 40 years old. She is a citizen of Lebanon. His second sister was born in Sierra 
Leone in October 1972 and is 35 years old. She is a citizen of Lebanon. His half brother 
was born in Sierra Leone in January 1957 and is 51 years old. He is a citizen of 
Lebanon. Applicant’s mother, two sisters, and half brother are U.S. resident aliens 
(green card holders). (SOR ¶ 2.a., 2.b.) GE 1, GE 2. Applicant’s father was born in 
Lebanon in January 1924 and was the proprietor of his privately owned textile store. His 
father spent most of his working life in Sierra Leone, and was assisted by his wife 
(Applicant’s mother) in the family business. In 1994, his father returned to Lebanon. 
During a visit to the U.S. in 2001, Applicant’s father passed. To honor his father’s 
wishes, Applicant’s family interned his remains in Lebanon. Tr. 38-40, 44-45, 72-73. 
 
Before Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he held a Lebanese passport, which he 
continues to maintain. He renewed his Lebanese passport, most recently in July 2004. It 
does not expire until July 2009. The renewal of his Lebanese passport occurred after he 
became a U.S. citizen and was issued a U.S. passport. GE 2, Tr. 41-42. He intends to 
maintain his Lebanese passport “to continue to visit my father’s burial site and pass that 
tradition to my children.” GE 2. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c.) Applicant does not believe he could 
renounce his Lebanese citizenship nor is he wiling to give up his Lebanese passport. 
His purpose in keeping his Lebanese passport is ease of travel to visit his father’s 
gravesite in Lebanon. Tr. 88-91. 
 
Applicant has three family members living in Lebanon, two half sisters and one 
half brother. His first half sister was born in February 1954 in Sierra Leone and is 54 
years old. His second half sister was born in April 1955 in Sierra Leone and is 53 years 
old. His half brother was born in Sierra Leone in January 1958 and is 50 years old. His 
two half sisters and half brother are resident citizens of Lebanon. (SOR ¶ 2.c.) Two of 
his other half sisters who lived in Lebanon are deceased. None of his siblings are 
employed by or associated with the Lebanese government. Applicant described them as 
apolitical and more focused on day to day survival. Tr. 68-70. 
 
Applicant “maintain[s] phone contacts mainly with [his] half-sisters once every 
four to six weeks.” He is not “on best terms” with his half brother. He keeps in touch with 
his half brother vicariously through his half sisters. GE 2, Tr. 50-51, 62-63. Applicant 
 4
                                                     
does not have property or financial assets in Lebanon nor does he stand to inherit any 
property in Lebanon. Tr. 57, 79-80. 
 
Applicant has traveled to Lebanon at least three times since 1999. The first visit 
was in November/December 1999 and was prompted after his father broke his hip. He 
was accompanied by his wife and first born son who was one year old at the time. The 
second visit occurred in June 2001/July 2001, for the specific purpose of returning his 
father’s remains to Lebanon and ensuring that he was buried according to his wishes. 
Tr. 43-44. The third visit was in April 2003/May 2003 for a family visit. (SOR ¶ 2.d.) He 
has no current plans to visit Lebanon. GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 43-46. Applicant has various 
other relatives living in Lebanon who he visited or saw during his visits to Lebanon, 
especially during his 2003 visit. Tr. 48-49. Applicant used his Lebanese passport during 
all three of his visits. Tr. 58-59. 
 
Applicant and his wife own a condominium in a state where they used to live. 
Applicant and his family currently live in a rental apartment. He has an 401k through his 
employer, a term life insurance policy, and estimates he has “about $300” in his bank 
accounts. Applicant stated he earns an annual salary of $39,000 per year and his wife 
earns the same for a total joint income of $78,000. He is registered to vote in the U.S. 
and exercises all rights of U.S. citizenship. Tr. 80-85. 
 
Lebanon1 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Lebanon became independent 
in November 1943.  Its history since independence Ahas been marked by periods of 
political turmoil interspersed with prosperity.@  Since independence in 1943, Lebanon=s 
Anational policy has been determined largely by a relatively restricted group of traditional 
regional and sectarian leaders,@ and sectarianism is Aa key element of Lebanese 
political life.@  Furthermore, ALebanese political institutions often play a secondary role to 
highly confessionalized personality-based politics.@ 
 
In April 1975, full-scale civil war broke out in Lebanon, and it did not end until 
1991.  Although Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy, civil war precluded the effective 
exercise of political rights from the mid-1970s until 1992.  During the period 1992 to 
2005, post-war reconstruction in Lebanon has included social and political instability, 
economic uncertainty, and problems with basic infrastructure, violent clashes between 
Israeli military forces and Hezbollah, and political assassinations. Political 
assassinations also occurred in 2006 and 2007. 
 
Although Lebanon is a parliamentary republic, it has some human rights 
problems, including: Lebanese security forces Aarbitrarily arrested and detained 
individuals@ and Ainstances of arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of life, torture, and other 
abuse.@  Lebanese law does not specifically prohibit torture, and security forces have 
abused detainees and used torture in some instances.  Although Lebanese law requires 
1 The contents of the Lebanon section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I(A), I through X. 
 5
judicial warrants before arrests, except in situations involving immediate pursuit, the 
government had arbitrarily arrested and detained persons.  Many provisions of the law 
concerning the rights of persons arrested and detained are not observed in practice, 
and security forces continue the practice of arbitrary arrest and detention.  Although the 
law prohibits it, Lebanese authorities Afrequently interfered with the privacy of persons 
regarded as enemies of the government.@  Furthermore, A[m]ilitias and non-Lebanese 
forces operating outside the area of [Lebanon=s] central government authority frequently 
violated citizens= privacy rights@ and A[v]arious factions used informer networks and 
monitoring of telephones to obtain information regarding their perceived adversaries.@ 
 
ALebanon=s foreign policy has been heavily influenced by neighboring Syria, 
which has also long influenced Lebanon=s internal polices as well.@ Syria maintained 
troops in Lebanon from 1976 to 2005.  Even after the last Syrian troops were withdrawn 
from Lebanon, Syria maintained intelligence assets in Lebanon, and A Syrian influence 
in Lebanese politics remains strong.@  Syria has been designated by the United States 
as a Astate sponsor of terrorism,@ and has Acontinued to undermine Lebanon=s 
sovereignty and security through its proxies.@  On May 9, 2008, the Secretary of State 
condemned the use of violence by illegitimate armed groups in Lebanon, and stated 
that the legitimate authority of the Lebanese government and the institutions of the 
Lebanese state were being undermined by Hezbollah and its allies, backed by Syria 
and Iran. 
 
Hezbollah, a ALebanese-based radical Shia group [which] takes its ideological 
inspiration from the Iranian revolution and the teachings of the late Ayatollah Khomeini,@ 
is a U.S.-designated AForeign Terrorist Organization,@ and is described by the U.S. 
Department of State as Athe most technically capable terrorist group in the world.@  The 
Lebanese government recognizes Hezbollah as a Alegitimate >resistance group= and 
political party,@ and until recently, Hezbollah was represented by elected members of 
the Lebanese Parliament and on Lebanon=s cabinet.  AHezbollah is closely allied with 
Iran and often acts at its behest,@ and Ahas helped Syria advance its political objectives 
in the region.@  Hezbollah also Aprovides support to several Palestinian terrorist 
organizations@ and Ais known to have been involved in numerous anti-U.S. and anti-
Israeli terrorist attacks.@   
 
Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon, and 
the perpetrators of many of those attacks are still present in Lebanon and retain the 
ability to act.  Furthermore, Palestinian groups hostile to the Lebanese government and 
the United States operate largely autonomously inside refugee camps in different areas 
of Lebanon.  AIn addition to being subject to general Lebanese law, U.S. citizens who 
also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to other laws that impose special 
obligations on them as Lebanese citizens.@ 
 
A Travel Warning issued by the U.S. Department of State in May 2008 alerts 
American citizens to Asecurity threats and ongoing political violence in Lebanon.@  The 
U.S. Department of State Acontinues to urge that Americans avoid all travel to 
Lebanon,@ and that AAmericans who live and work in Lebanon presently should 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
understand that they are accepting risks in remaining and carefully consider those 
risks.@ 
 
On May 7, 2008, Hezbollah militants blocked the road to Rafiq Hariri International 
Airport. The action rendered the airport inaccessible and travelers were unable to enter 
or leave the country via commercial air carriers. Armed Hezbollah and other opposition 
members proceeded to enter areas of Lebanon not traditionally under their control 
resulting in heavy fighting and a number of casualties. While there is now full access to 
the airport and widespread hostilities have subsided, the United States is concerned 
about Hezbollah’s willingness to use violence to achieve political ends with little or no 
warning.  
 
The threat of anti-Western terrorist activity exists in Lebanon; groups such as Al-
Qaeda and Jund al-Sham are present in the country and have issued statements calling 
for attacks against Western interests in the past. There have been cases involving the 
attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Hezbollah.  In August 
2005, an individual pleaded guilty to attempting to illegally  export military night-vision 
equipment and infrared aiming devices to Hezbollah.  In November 2007, an individual 
pleaded guilty to attempting to provide night vision goggles, a thermal imaging device, 
and two global positioning modules to a person in Lebanon who was purchasing 
equipment for Hezbollah. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                     
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 9, the Government’s concern is: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 sets out one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
8 
 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 Applicant applied for a Lebanese passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
maintains his Lebanese passport primarily for ease of travel to visit his father’s gravesite 
in Lebanon. He renewed his Lebanese passport in 2004 and it will not expire until 2009. 
He used his Lebanese passport in lieu of his U.S. passport during visits to Lebanon in 
1999, 2001, and 2003. He understands maintaining his Lebanese citizenship and 
Lebanese passport is at odds with DoD security policy. 
 
 Three Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 11 are potentially 
mitigating to this disqualifying condition: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Had Applicant complied with the mitigating conditions supra, especially AG ¶¶ 
11(b) and 11(e), he could well have mitigated this concern. Having chosen to maintain 
his Lebanese citizenship and his Lebanese passport for future travel to Lebanon 
precludes application of these mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 6, the Government’s concern is:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.4 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his two half sisters and to a lesser extent 
his half brother living in Lebanon. Applicant feels it is important to maintain these 
contacts. He also maintains his Lebanese citizenship and passport for ease of travel to 
Lebanon especially for purposes of future visits to his father’s gravesite. Applicant 
visited Lebanon in 1999, 2001, and 2003. These contacts create a risk of foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
individuals adverse to the U.S. may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about 
the United States. His connection to his family members also creates a potential conflict 
of interest because his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern 
about his desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
These close family connections create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because of the existence of terrorists or terrorism within 
Lebanon. These terrorist activities are at odds with the U.S. and U.S. interests. His 
connections to his Lebanese family also create a potential conflict of interest because 
his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his possible 
desire to help his family by providing sensitive information. In short, his connections with 
his family members in Lebanon create a “heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
4  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that only mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient 
relationship and loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United 
States for approximately 22 years. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen and all of his financial 
and business interests are in the United States. Applicant has established himself as an 
American citizen and embarked on a successful career. He has a track record of diligent 
labor as an employee of his company. Although this mitigating condition is partially 
applicable, it is insufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
He has contacts and close relationships with his two half sisters in Lebanon and 
to a lesser extent with his half brother. He remains in frequent contact with his family 
members in Lebanon. Applicant also has a strong bond with his late father as 
demonstrated by his desire to maintain his Lebanese citizenship and passport for ease 
of travel to visit his gravesite.  
 
Guidelines ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. Applicant did not establish “it is unlikely 
[he] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of [his 
Lebanese family] and the interests of the U.S.” His frequent contacts and close 
relationships with his Lebanese relatives could potentially force him to choose between 
the United States and Lebanon. He did not meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his relationships with his Lebanese family members] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
 
11 
 
 
The nature of Lebanon’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
activities within its border, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has 
an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country and/or factions within the country is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. The hostility of certain factions within 
Lebanon to the United States places a “very heavy burden of persuasion” on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his immediate family members in Lebanon do not pose a security 
risk and he will not be placed into a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to 
the United States and his Lebanese family members. With its adversarial stance and its 
negative human rights record, it is likely that Lebanon and/or factions within Lebanon 
would target any citizen in an attempt to gather classified or sensitive information from 
the United States. 
 
There is no evidence that the Lebanese government or any faction within 
Lebanon has approached any of his Lebanese family for any reason, and in particular, 
has not approached them recently about Applicant. There is no evidence that his family 
living in Lebanon currently engages in activities which would bring attention to 
themselves or that they are even aware of her work.  
 
Notwithstanding, Foreign Influence mitigating conditions cannot be applied in this 
case, and the security concerns cannot be fully mitigated because there is no reason for 
Lebanon to contact his relatives about Applicant until he receives access to classified 
information. Even taking for granted that his Lebanese family members currently have 
low-key non-controversial lifestyles, and that the Lebanese government and/or factions 
within Lebanon have not contacted them about Applicant in the past, such factors are 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns because of the nature of such entities and 
its relationship to the United States. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant averred his loyalty to the United States, that he considers himself to be 
an American, and his desire to continue his present work. Applicant has lived in the U.S. 
for 22 years and has been a naturalized citizen for 11 years. When he became a U.S. 
citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. His mother, two sisters and one half 
brother are U.S. permanent residents.  
 
Applicant’s statement about his loyalty to the United States is credible, and there 
is no reason to believe that he would take any action which could cause potential harm 
to his U.S. family or to this country. He has the respect and trust of his employer. There 
is no evidence that he has revealed to his family in Lebanon the nature of his work or 
about applying for a security clearance.   
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant traveled to Lebanon on three separate occasions in 
1999, 2001, and 2003. He has family members, two half sisters and one half brother, 
who are resident citizens of Lebanon. Applicant and his family enjoy a close 
relationship. Applicant has strong ties of affection and/or obligation to his Lebanese 
family members. Because his family members live in Lebanon, they are vulnerable to 
coercion or exploitation by Lebanon and/or factions within Lebanon.  
 
 Numerous circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. 
For example, the threat of anti-Western terrorist activity exists in Lebanon with groups 
such as Al-Qaeda and Jund al-Sham present in the country and have issued statements 
calling for attacks against Western interests. There have been cases involving the 
attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Hezbollah. Lebanon 
and/or factions within Lebanon are currently in an adversarial position with respect to 
the United States. Applicant spent the first 19 years of his life in Lebanon and Sierra 
Leone, which can arguably be referred to as his formative years. He has family 
members who are Lebanese citizens living in Lebanon, and he remains in touch with 
those relatives through frequent and non-casual direct and vicarious contact. These 
contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is 
always the possibility that Lebanese agents and/or terrorists may attempt to use 
Applicant’s family members living in Lebanon to obtain information about the United 
States.  
 
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence. The evidence 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  
 
13 
 
 
For reasons discussed supra, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
concerns arising from his foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph1.a. – 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a. – 2.d.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
