 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03286 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 6, 2007. On 
May 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 19, 2008; answered it on 
June 3, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received 
the request on June 4, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 12, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me on July 29, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 30, 2008, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented the testimony of three 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted 
without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on September 3, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline H 
and denied the allegations under Guideline E. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old systems engineer for a federal contractor. He earned a 
bachelor of science degree in physics and chemistry in 2002 (AX B) and a M.B.A. in 
September 2006 (AX C). He has worked for his current employer since October 2007. 
He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 On his security clearance application (e-QIP), Applicant disclosed that he used 
marijuana about 25 times between September 1998 and May 2002. He also disclosed 
that he used cocaine about 63 times between September 1998 and the “present” (GX 1 
at 33). He signed his application on November 6, 2007 (GX 1 at 36 and 37).  
 
 In his response to DOHA interrogatories on March 25, 2008, Applicant again 
disclosed his uses of marijuana and cocaine, and he also disclosed had used ecstasy 
about four times a year until December 2005, used methamphetamine twice, and taken 
pain killers about ten times a year until 2004. He stated he would not use illegal drugs or 
use prescription drugs unlawfully in the future (GX 2 at 3). 
 
 In his response to additional DOHA interrogatories on April 15, 2008, Applicant 
disclosed using marijuana about 25 times ending in May 2002, using cocaine about 60 
times ending in November 2007, and using ecstasy about 20 times ending in 2006. He 
stated his drug use had been declining over the past three years and it was easy for him 
to stop when he was offered his current job (GX 3 at 3). 
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in January 2008, Applicant 
admitted using marijuana about 25 times while an undergraduate in college. He 
remembered purchasing marijuana twice. On all other occasions, someone gave him 
the marijuana (GX 4 at 1). He also admitted his cocaine use and admitted purchasing 
cocaine twice while in graduate school and once after he graduated (GX 4 at 2). He 
admitted using methamphetamine once and ecstasy about 10 times while in college and 
10 more times after graduation, usually paying $20 for one pill (GX 4 at 4). Finally, he 
 
3 
 
 
admitted traveling to Canada and purchasing 100 or 200 painkiller pills containing 
codeine without a prescription. The purchase was lawful in Canada, but a prescription 
was required in the U.S. Sometimes he used the pills for pain relief and sometimes to 
become intoxicated. He shared the pills with his friends until they were all consumed 
(GX 4 at 5). 
 
 According to the security investigator’s summary of the interview, Applicant told 
the security investigator he did not disclose his methamphetamine use on his e-QIP 
because methamphetamine is similar to cocaine and he believed his methamphetamine 
use was covered in his use of cocaine. It also states Applicant told the investigator he 
did not disclose his use of ecstasy because he did not think the question about illegal 
drug use covered ecstasy (GX 4 at 4-5), and he told the investigator he did not disclose 
his illegal use of prescription pain killers because it was an oversight (GX 4 at 5). 
 
 Applicant testified he did not disclose his methamphetamine use on his e-QIP 
because he did not remember it, until his memory was triggered by the interview (Tr. 
46). He said the security investigator’s report of his interview was inaccurate, because 
the investigator suggested he might have thought that methamphetamine use was 
included in cocaine use, and he agreed, even though it was not really what he was 
thinking (Tr. 47). He admitted he did not tell the investigator he had forgotten about his 
methamphetamine use (Tr. 48).  
 
 Applicant testified he did not disclose his ecstasy use on his e-QIP because he 
did not think of it, and nothing jogged his memory (Tr. 53). He denied telling the security 
investigator he did not think the question about drug use covered ecstasy. He testified 
he told the investigator there was nothing in the application that triggered his memory of 
his ecstasy use (Tr. 55-56). 
 
 Applicant testified he last used marijuana in 2005, but his memory was “a little 
fuzzier” because his marijuana use declined gradually (Tr. 40). He also testified he did 
not disclose any marijuana use after 2002 on his e-QIP because he did not remember 
the isolated incidents of use after his graduation (Tr. 41-42). 
 
 Applicant testified he did not disclose his illegal use of prescription pain killers on 
his e-QIP because he did not remember it. He characterized it as an isolated incident, 
which he did not remember until the security investigator started asking him about travel 
outside the country (Tr. 58-59). 
 
 Applicant testified he completed his e-QIP on line at home. He completed it twice 
because the first attempt “got snagged somewhere” and was not received. It took 
several days to complete it (Tr. 38-40). He did not seek help from his security officer or 
anyone else to interpret the questions (Tr. 40). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant used a line graph (AX A) to depict his cocaine use. 
Referring to the graph, he testified that 80 to 90 percent of his cocaine use occurred 
between 2000 and 2004, while he was in college. After graduation, his cocaine use 
 
4 
 
 
declined to once or twice a year and then stopped entirely (Tr. 34-35). He presented his 
transcripts (AX B and C) to demonstrate that his cocaine use did not affect his academic 
performance, even though he was also working full-time while in his M.B.A. program 
(Tr. 35-36). He testified he last used any illegal drugs was in September 2007, and the 
entry on his e-QIP was reflecting last drug use in November 2007 was incorrect (Tr. 36). 
 
 An active duty captain in the U.S. Marine Corps testified for Applicant (Tr. 64-68). 
The witness and Applicant went to high school and college together and were members 
of the same fraternity. The witness was aware of Applicant’s drug use in college, 
because it was common knowledge among their circle of friends. In 1999, when they 
were sophomores, he voted for Applicant to be the fraternity vice-president of finance. 
Applicant was responsible for fraternity funds of about $170,000. The following year, he 
voted for Applicant to be president of the fraternity, because of his good performance as 
vice-president of finance and because of his good relations with the alumni and 
university officials.  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, who also attended the same college as Applicant and was 
a member of the same fraternity, testified for Applicant (Tr. 73-79). He was aware of 
Applicant’s drug use in college, but he voted for Applicant to be the vice-president for 
finance because he was reliable. He voted for Applicant to be president of the fraternity 
because he was respected in the college community and the fraternity. He recruited 
Applicant to come to work for his current employer, knowing that he would need a 
security clearance. 
 
 Another of Applicant’s supervisors, who also is the facility security officer, 
testified they recruited and selected Applicant because of his strong referrals and 
professional experience. He was aware of Applicant’s prior drug use, but regarded it as 
“bad choices in the past” and not indicative of his current or future performance (Tr. 81-
82). When Applicant started filling out his e-QIP, the witness advised him to not 
embellish but to not cover up anything (Tr. 85). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
5 
 
 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges multiple instances of illegal drug use between September 1998 
and November 2007, as well as purchases of cocaine, marijuana, and ecstasy. The 
concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of a 
prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
 
6 
 
 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses use or misuse of Adrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens). AG 
¶ 24(a)(1). Drug abuse is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse,@ and 
Aillegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). The evidence raises these two disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on the recentness of drug involvement. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.   
 
 Applicant’s e-QIP indicates he was still using cocaine when he signed it. At the 
hearing, he testified the e-QIP was incorrect and that he stopped using illegal drugs in 
September 2007, about 11 months before the hearing. I conclude his drug use was 
recent. The 11-month period followed ten years of regular and sometimes frequent drug 
use. During all of those 11 months of abstinence, Applicant has been undergoing 
scrutiny, including an interview by a security investigator in January 2008, and DOHA 
interrogatories in March and April 2008. He has not carried his burden of persuading me 
that he will not resume his drug use once he is relieved of pressure of obtaining a 
clearance. Thus, I conclude the first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. The 
remaining prongs of AG ¶ 26(a) are likewise not established. His drug use was frequent, 
did not occur under unusual circumstances, and casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
 
7 
 
 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b)(1)-(4).  
 
 Applicant admitted at the hearing he still associates with some of his drug-using 
friends and a friend offered him cocaine in March 2008. For the reasons noted above, 
he has not had “an appropriate period of abstinence.” I conclude AG ¶ 26(b) is not 
established.  
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition is not 
established because Applicant has not received any drug treatment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his e-QIP by disclosing his marijuana and 
cocaine use but not disclosing his use of methamphetamine, ecstasy, and prescription 
drugs. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). When a 
falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s state of mind 
when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case 
No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant’s drug use covered ten years, and it is understandable that he might 
not accurately recall the specific dates, frequency, and quantities of the drugs he 
purchased and used. It is somewhat plausible that he might even have forgotten 
isolated incidents, such as his one-time purchase of pain killers in Canada or one-time 
experimentation with methamphetamine. It is less plausible that he would forget his use 
of ecstasy ten times while in college and ten more times after graduation. It also is less 
 
8 
 
 
plausible that he would not remember his continued use of marijuana after graduation. 
After considering all the evidence of record, I am satisfied Applicant knew his drug use 
was an issue, knew his employers were aware of his drug use in college, knew that 
there was no evidence of his drug use other than his own admissions, and decided to 
understate his drug use on his e-QIP. Based on the above considerations, I conclude 
the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant made no effort to correct his omissions until he was 
interviewed by a security investigator in January 2008. I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct also may be mitigated by showing 
“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Falsification of an e-QIP is a felony, not a minor offense. The falsification was recent 
and did not occur under unique circumstances. Applicant’s lack of candor casts doubt 
on his reliability and trustworthiness. I conclude this mitigating condition is not 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. My comments 
above concerning Guidelines H and E are incorporated in my whole person analysis. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant is well-educated, intelligent, and a natural leader, as evidenced by the 
testimony of his college classmates and fraternity brothers. He decision to stop his drug 
use was motivated by an opportunity for employment and the need for a clearance. His 
current employment may well be a turning point in his life, but he needs more time to 
demonstrate his desire to be drug free.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
