                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01074
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Yakeen Qawasmeh, Personal Representative 
September 29, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on November 13, 2006.  On April 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines C and B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 25, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was originally assigned to
another Administrative Judge on May 27, 2008.  It was transferred to the undersigned
on June 17, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on July 8, 2008, scheduling the
hearing for July 31, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented four exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4.  The Applicant called one witness,
presented twelve exhibits and testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open
until close of business on August 21, 2008, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to
2
submit additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted five Post-Hearing Exhibits
referred to as Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 5.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on August 8, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Jordan.  The Applicant and
his personal representative had no objection.  (Tr. p. 14).  The request and the attached
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 52 years of age.  He is employed as a
Production Supervisor for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Jordan in 1956 to Jordanian parents.  He grew up in
Jordan, and at the age of fourteen moved with his family to Kuwait.  In 1985 [Should this
be 1975?], the Applicant came to the United States with a student visa to go to school
and pursue the American dream.  That same year [Can’t become citizen same year you
move here.], he became a naturalized United States citizen.  Although he still thought of
himself as a dual citizen of the United States and Jordan, until recently.  Since
becoming aware of DoD’s policies concerning dual citizenship, the Applicant has
formally renounced his dual citizenship with Jordan.  (See Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibits 1 through 5).   
The Applicant is married to an American citizen and they have three children who
are all American citizens attending college.  None of them speak arabic.  The
Applicant’s in-laws also reside in the United States.  The Applicant also has one brother
who resides and is a naturalized citizen of the United States who has lived here for thirty
years.
The only immediate family that the Applicant has in Jordan is one brother and
one sister, who are citizens and residents of Jordan.  He contacts them by telephone
occasionally, about three or four times a year.  His brother is retired from a trucking
company, and his sister is a homemaker.  In the past, he sent monetary gifts to his
siblings to help out with funeral expenses but is not obligated to continue to do this.
They are not affiliated with the Jordanian Government in any respect.  The Applicant
has many extended family members who have the same last name as the Applicant but
3
whom he does not know or have any affiliation with.  The only financial interest he had
in Jordan was an interest in a parcel  of land he shared with his siblings and cousins,
once owned by his father.  The land is located in Jordan on the West Bank and the
approximate value of the land is $20,000.00.  The Applicant has since transferred that
interest and no longer owns it.  All of his financial interests and assets are in the United
States that include a house, a retirement fund from his employer.
Since moving to the United States, the Applicant has traveled to Jordan on four
occasions, 1977, 1980, 1994, and 2007.  He attended a family reunion on one occasion
and on the other two occasions went to handle emergencies.  One time he thought that
his mother was dying, and the other time his sister was in a coma and did pass away.   
In 2008, the Applicant assisted the FBI when he reported that he noticed
activities that he thought would be harmful to the United States.  (Tr. p. 73).  The
individual involved is now serving jail time.
The Applicant began working for his current employer in 1997 and applied for a
Secret level security clearance at that time.  He was initially denied a clearance but
appealed and voluntarily underwent a Anti-Terrorism and Anti-Espionage polygraph
exam.  He was subsequent granted his clearance and has held it without incident.   
  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
The Applicant used his American passport on two occasions to enter and exit
Jordan, but during his most recent trip he used his Jordanian passport.  (See
Government Exhibit 2).  The Applicant was not aware that by renewing his Jordanian
passport his security clearance could be in jeopardy.  When learning of DoD’s policy
concerning possession of a foreign passport, the Applicant surrendered his passport to
the Security Officer at his company.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit I).  Since then, the
Applicant has gone even a step further and has completely destroyed his Jordanian
passport once and for all.  (See Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 5).  
The Applicant has fully assimilated into the American culture and is involved in
his community.  He has coached basketball and helped with the Special Olympics.
(See Applicant’s Exhibit J).  He has volunteered to feed the homeless and after 9-11
started working at churches to hold memorials for the victims.  He is active in state
politics and votes in every election.     
The United States Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation award
was issued to the Applicant for his outstanding assistance in connection with their
investigation dated June 2008.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit L). 
Various letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s community leaders,
including the mayor, a religious leader, his neighbors and friends attest to the
Applicant’s kindness, respectful attitude, community service, good judgment, and
honest and forthright nature.  They consider him to be a very honorable and respected
4
man who loves the United States for the freedoms and opportunities it has afforded him
and his family.  (See Applicant’s Exhibits B, C, D , E, F, G and H).  
ADD INFORMATION ON JORDAN
      
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
theses persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
5
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or he may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
11.  (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign
country;
11.  (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
11.  (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
6
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline C (foreign preference),
and Guideline B (foreign influence) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown
between Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign preference and has foreign
connections may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises
legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government
must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to
abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  Mitigating
Conditions 8. (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which theses persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that
7
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government
and the interests of the U.S. and 8. (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is
so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation applies.
It is acknowledged that the Applicant has a brother and a sister who reside in
Jordan and that he contacts on an occasional basis.  In the past, he has sent money to
them to help with funeral costs.  Although he has extended family members in Jordan,
he has no association with them whatsoever, or any allegiance to them, or with the
Jordanian Government.  It is noted that the current political situation in Jordan elevates
the cause for concern in this case.  However, in this case, the Applicant has lived in the
United States for the past thirty years.  He has been a resident and citizen of the United
States for 23 years.  He has a wife and three children who are American citizens.  All of
his financial assets are in the United States.  He has fully in cultured himself well into
American values and the American culture.  He participates in his local community, and
has even been commended by the FBI for assisting them in the past.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the possibility of foreign influence does not exist nor could it
create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I
find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member applies.  However, Mitigation Conditions 11(a)
dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country, 11(b)
the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship, and 11(e) the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated also apply.
The Applicant was a dual citizen of Jordan and the United States.  Since then
[when?] he has formally renounced his Jordanian citizenship and destroyed his
Jordanian passport.  Except for his two siblings in Jordan, he has essentially cut all ties
to that country.  Under the circumstances of this case, I find for the Applicant under
Guideline C (Foreign Preference). 
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guidelines B and C of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the
Directive.  Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guidelines
B and C.  
8
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 2.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 2.b.: For the Applicant
 Subpara. 2.c.: For the Applicant
 
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
