 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within
the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-02912
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant is a 24-year-old man who was charged with and/or convicted of five
alcohol-related offenses between August 2002 and March 2008. He has failed to mitigate
the security concern caused by his alcohol consumption. 
On May 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). Applicant’s
response to the SOR was received by DOHA on June 23, 2008. Applicant admitted all
SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant was notified of the hearing date by Department Counsel on August 13, 2008. He agreed2
at that time to the hearing date of September 5, 2008, and waived on the record any objection he might have
in the event he did not timely receive the formal notice of hearing. (Tr. pp. 17-19)  
2
The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued
on August 20, 2008, scheduling the hearing for September 5, 2008.  The hearing was2
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted two documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-2. GE 1 was admitted into the record without
objection. Applicant’s objection to admission of the partial Report of Investigation (ROI)
contained in GE 2 was sustained. The remainder of GE 2 was admitted into the record
without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any documentary exhibits. The
transcript was received on September 18, 2008.     
Procedural Issues
Department Counsel moved at the hearing to amend the SOR by changing the
name of the city listed in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c to conform to the evidence. Each
amendment was made on the face of the SOR without objection.
Findings of Fact
After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 24-year-old single man who has been employed as an electrical
engineer by a defense contractor since January 2007. He worked as an intern for this
same defense during the summer of 2006. Applicant graduated from college in December
2006, and was awarded a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering. 
Applicant was convicted of Possession/Consumption of Alcohol Under the Legal
Age in August 2002 and again in May 2003. He was fined on both occasions. Applicant
was a college student when these offenses occurred. 
In August 2007, following his graduation from college and while he was employed
by the defense contractor, Applicant was charged with public intoxication. In this incident,
he was arrested, handcuffed, booked into a jail and held in a cell overnight. He was
convicted and fined $135.
In November 2007, Applicant was charged with Operating a Vehicle While Impaired
(OWI). His blood alcohol content (BAC) was 0.17. Applicant was again booked into a jail
and held overnight. He was convicted of this offense in February 2008, and sentenced to
serve two days in jail (suspended), fined $1,250, and had his driving privileges revoked for
30 days and an ignition interlock system installed in his car for six months. He was also
ordered to attend a session wherein he was required to remain incarcerated in a hotel for
two days while attending alcohol awareness classes.
3
Applicant obtained an alcohol evaluation following the OWI arrest. The certified
alcohol and drug counselor (CADC) from a court recognized alcohol program indicated
Applicant met the DSM IV criteria for alcohol “abuse.” (GE 2) Her recommendations were
as follows:
(Applicant) tested High Probability of having a Substance Dependence
Disorder on the SASSI, did not meet the criteria for Dependence on the
DSM-IV, and did not meet the criteria for Substance Abuse Treatment on the
ASAM, the Client Assessment Form, and through the interview I conducted
this date. Therefore No Treatment is being recommended at this time. If
there are any further substance related problems (this includes positive
urinalysis) there would be a need for another screening to determine what
treatment options would be considered at that time. (GE 2)
On March 8, 2008, Applicant was charged with Public Intoxication while in a state
other than where he resides. He testified he had only consumed a few beers, but admitted
he was found by the police passed out on a public way. He suggested, without any
supporting evidence, that he was unwittingly drugged by a bartender. He received some
sort of deferred adjudication for this offense within the past few months. 
Applicant began consuming alcohol on weekends while he was in high school. He
admits he occasionally became intoxicated during this time. While in college, he consumed
beer on almost every Friday and Saturday night and became intoxicated on most
weekends. In April 2008, in response to interrogatories propounded to him by DOHA,
Applicant stated he consumes about 10 drinks per week. He testified he now only drinks
two to three beers a week. At the hearing, in response to a question from Department
Counsel inquiring if he had become intoxicated at any time following his March 2008 arrest,
Applicant testified:
Not intoxicated to the point that I was being irresponsible, just slightly, you
know a couple of beers. If you’re going by the law, .08, yes; intoxicated to the
point where I was being irresponsible, no. (Tr. pp. 55-56)
Applicant has not received any alcohol treatment. He intends to continue consuming
alcohol.  
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline G (alcohol consumption)
with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
4
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] ¶ 21)  
Applicant has been charged with and/or convicted of alcohol-related offenses on five
occasions since 2002. His most recent offense occurred in March 2008, less than one
month after he was convicted of OWI and required to attend alcohol awareness classes
while being detained in a hotel. He has been diagnosed as alcohol abusive by a CADC.
5
He has not received any alcohol treatment. He admits he has consumed alcohol to excess
since his last arrest and has expressed an intent to consume alcohol in the future.  
Disqualifying Conditions (DC): 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such
as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace,
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; DC 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol
to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; DC 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program all apply.
Despite his many alcohol-related arrests, including three within a very recent seven-
month period, Applicant fails to accept that he may have a serious alcohol problem and
has espoused his intent to continue consuming alcohol. His most recent arrest occurred
a mere six months ago and he admits to drinking to excess since then. Mitigating
Conditions (MC) 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and MC
23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse,
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a
pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser) do
not apply.
In November 2007, the CADC wrote there would be need for another screening to
determine what treatment options should be considered for Applicant. He was arrested four
months later, after being found passed out on a public way, but has not sought another
evaluation or entered into any treatment program. Thus, MC 23(d): the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any
required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program
does not apply. The remaining mitigating condition has no applicability to the facts of this
case.    
   
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis. Further, it must once again be noted that any reasonable doubt about
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information must be resolved
in favor of protecting national security.
6
Accordingly, and considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances
present in this case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6
of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant
has failed to mitigate the security concern caused by his alcohol consumption. He has
failed to overcome the case against him in this regard or satisfy his ultimate burden of
persuasion. Guideline G is decided against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

