                                                                
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 08-04187 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his latest Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative 
Processing (e-QIP) to update his security clearance on May 23, 2007.  On June 10, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H for drug involvement, 
Guideline E for personal conduct, and Guideline J for criminal conduct.  The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
June18, 2008.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 27, 2008.  He admitted some and 
denied others of the allegations.  He requested a hearing before an Administrative 
Judge.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed with the case on August 6, 2008.  
The case was assigned to me on August 7, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 13, 2008, for a hearing on September 2, 2008.  I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
scheduled.  The government offered 12 exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 12, which were received without objection.  Applicant submitted two 
documents, marked as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A-B, which were received without 
objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on September 11, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies using marijuana from 1975 until at 
least December 2005 or January 2006.  He admitted contributing to the purchase of 
marijuana twice since 2000.  He admitted using opium in 1977 and mushrooms in 1981.  
He admitted using cocaine with varying frequency from 1986 until December 2005 or 
January 2006.  He admitted to taking more than the recommended dosage of 
prescription painkillers to get high from 2001 until February 2006.  He denies 
purchasing cocaine four times since 2000.  Applicant also denies the allegation of false 
answers on security clearance applications submitted in September 1987, January 
1995, July 2000, and December 2005, as well as a February 11, 2008 affidavit to 
security investigators.  He denies that he was not granted access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) by a government agency in July 2006, that he used 
marijuana and cocaine after being granted access to classified information in 2002 and 
SCI in 2003, that he violated Air Force policy by using marijuana and cocaine from 1986 
until 1990, and that he used marijuana, cocaine, and improperly used prescription drugs 
after submitting a security clearance application on December 14, 2005.  He denied the 
resulting criminal conduct for providing false answers.  During the hearing, Applicant 
testified differently concerning some of his admissions.  Those differences will be 
discussed as findings of fact.  I thoroughly and carefully reviewed the case file and the 
pleadings.  I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and has been a functional analyst for a defense 
contractor for about 2 years.  He has an associate's degree in engineering technology, 
and a bachelor's degree in Information Systems Management.  He served four years on 
active duty with the Air Force from 1986 until 1990.  After his release from active duty 
until he started working for his present defense contractor employer, he worked for 
various organizations, some of which were government contractors, or was self-
employed.  He is married with one child.  Applicant first received a security clearance in 
1987 when he was on active duty with the Air Force.  He has been granted access to 
classified information at various times since 1987 (Gov. Ex. 9, e-QIP, dated May 23, 
2007; Applicant Exhibit A, Resume, undated).  A friend and former college football team 
member noted that Applicant overcame numerous injuries to continue to play football at 
the college level. He worked hard and contributed to his team's success. He has a 
strong work ethic and is intelligent, resourceful, and energetic.  He favorably impresses 
his neighbors, church members, colleagues, and business associates.  Applicant's 
ability to motivate earns him respect admiration and popularity among his peers 
(Applicant Exhibit B, Letter, undated). 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has submitted a number of security clearance applications and has 
been interviewed by security investigators various times since 1987.  He has provided 
different information concerning his use of drugs during this process.  In his first security 
clearance application when he entered active duty with the Air Force, Applicant 
answered "NO" to the question concerning use of narcotics (Gov. Ex. 1, Personnel 
Security Questionnaire, dated September 16, 1987).  Applicant acknowledged that he 
had used illegal drugs prior to entering active duty.  However, he states that he was 
advised by the Air Force recruiter to not list his drug use because it could cause the Air 
Force to question whether he should be accepted on active duty (Tr. 24).  He did not 
reveal any drug use and was granted access to classified information.  
 
 Applicant submitted a request for access to SCI, was interviewed, and again did 
not report any use of illegal drugs (Gov. Ex. 2, SCI Screening Interview, notice, 
undated; Gov. Ex. 3, Report of Investigation, dated May 4, 1995; Gov. Ex. 4, Personnel 
Security Questionnaire, dated January 31, 1995). He submitted another security 
clearance application for a periodic update of his access to SCI in 2000 and did not 
report any use of illegal drugs (Gov. Ex. 5, Security clearance application, dated July 
15, 2000). 
 
 Applicant submitted another security clearance application to a government 
agency for periodic update of his access to SCI on December 14, 2005.  Again, he did 
not report any illegal drug use.  Applicant was interviewed by security investigators who 
submitted Applicant to a polygraph examination.  In the first interview and polygraph on 
February 13, 2006, Applicant reported using marijuana two times when he was 16 years 
old in 1975.  He also reported using a steroid drug while playing college football in 1981.  
He admitted using prescription painkillers prescribed for pain after an automobile 
accident in 2004 not for pain relief but to get high.  
 
 Applicant was again interviewed and received a polygraph test on March 28, 
2006.  During the interview and test, he listed his use of marijuana to no more than four 
times and his use of steroids to no more than five times in a two week period.  He 
denied abusing prescription medication after August 2004.  He noted that he was 
prescribed painkillers in January 2006 after hand surgery but took the drugs as 
prescribed.  He denied any other illegal drug use.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed and received a third polygraph test on June 5, 2006.  
He now states his use of marijuana was no more than 10 times from 1977 until 1984.  
He admitted to assisting with the purchase of marijuana by "chipping in" $5 no more 
than five times.  He admitted using marijuana about 25 times from 1984 until 2000.  He 
admitted using marijuana from 2000 until the summer of 2005 about five times.  He 
again "chipped in" $5 twice during the times to purchase marijuana.  He further admitted 
to using opium one time in 1977, and mushrooms twice in 1981.  He admitted abusing 
prescription drugs twice in July 2005, and 10 times from 2003 until February 2006.  He 
stopped using prescription drugs in February 2006 because he anticipated having 
security clearance interviews and tests.  He further admitted to using cocaine six times 
form 1986 until 1990, eight times from 1990 until 2000, and four times from 2000 until 
December 2005.  He purchased cocaine four times since 2000, and purchased $100 
 
4 
 
worth of cocaine in December 2005.  He discontinued his use of cocaine in December 
2005 because of his pending security clearance interview and polygraph examination.   
 
 Based on these interviews and polygraph tests, Applicant was denied access to 
SCI as a result of his reported drug use (Gov. Ex. 6, Clearance Decision Statement, 
dated July 14, 2006; Gov. Ex. 7, Notification of Denial, dated July 28, 2006).  Applicant's 
appeal of the denial of access to SCI was denied (Gov. Ex. 8, Final outcome of Appeal, 
dated April 24, 2007; See also, Gov. Ex. 12, JPAS history, dated February 25, 2008).   
 
 Applicant completed his latest e-QIP on May 23, 2007.  In response to questions 
concerning his use of illegal drugs, Applicant responded "YES" to question 24a asking if 
in the last seven years he illegally used any controlled substance.  He responded "YES" 
to question 24b asking if he ever illegally used a controlled substance while in a law 
enforcement position or while possessing a security clearance.  He elaborated on his 
response by noting that he used pain killers prescribed by his physician ten times 
between September 2001 and February 2002.  He did not indicate if the use was as 
prescribed by the physician or not as prescribed by the physician.  He listed using 
cocaine four times from December 2000 until December 2005.  He listed using 
marijuana six times from December 2000 until July 2005.  He also answered "YES" to 
question 26b asking if he had ever been denied or had a security clearance revoked.  
He commented that a government agency denied a security clearance in April 2007 for 
failing to pass a polygraph test because of drug involvement issues (Gov. Ex. 9, e-QIP, 
dated May 23, 2007). 
 
 In a November 2007 interview with a security investigator, Applicant stated he 
tried to answer all question in his February 2006 and March 2006 interviews truthfully 
but in doing so "split hairs."  As an example he cited that in response to questions, he 
stated he may have gotten high from marijuana five times but he may have touched 
marijuana more than five times but did not smoke that many times and each time he 
smoked he did not get high.  In his August 2006 interview he told everything about his 
drug use back to high school.  (Gov. Ex. 10, Affidavit, dated November 29, 2007). 
 
 In a February 2008 affidavit provided security investigators, Applicant stated he 
attended a holiday party between Christmas and New Years 2002 and snorted two or 
three lines of cocaine and smoked a marijuana cigarette.  A party attendee provided the 
drugs which were openly available.  Only a few people at the party used the drugs.  He 
attended a holiday party between Christmas and New Years 2003 and snorted two or 
three lines of cocaine and smoked a marijuana cigarette.  He did not pay for any of the 
drugs since they were passed around the party.  He attended a holiday party between 
Christmas and New Years 2005 and snorted a line of cocaine, and inhaled a marijuana 
cigarette.  The cocaine and marijuana were passed around the party.  Only a few 
people at the party used the drugs.  He contributed $100 to the party for food, alcohol, 
and drugs.  He attended a party in July 2005 and smoked part of a marijuana cigarette.  
He kept part of the cigarette and smoked it in August or September 2005.  He also 
noted his drug use has not caused him any financial problems or required medical 
attention. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant stated that during his first polygraph test, he was nervous and confused 
about the interviewer's questions concerning drug use.  He answered truthfully not 
wanting to leave out any information.  His answers to questions changed because the 
questions asked by the interviewer changed.  In his attempt to answer all questions 
truthfully in the second interview and polygraph test, the interviewer accused him of 
"splitting hairs."  He made distinctions between touching marijuana, smoking marijuana, 
and getting high from marijuana.  His nervousness increased based on the reaction of 
the interviewer and his questions.  In his third interview and polygraph test, he disclosed 
his drug use back to high school.  He was nervous in the interview but tried to answer 
truthfully the changing questions of the interviewer (Gov. Ex. 11, Affidavit, dated 
February 11, 2008). 
 
 Applicant provided conflicting information concerning his use of illegal drugs 
during the September 2, 2008 hearing, based on his definition of drug use.  Applicant 
stated that prior to undergoing the polygraph tests; there was no continued extended 
drug use.  He considered drug involvement to be at a party and have drugs passed 
around.  He knew he would be tested for drugs because of his employment, so he did 
not extensively use drugs to cause him to fail any drug tests.  The investigators' 
questions were always drug use or not drug use and he only had involvement (Tr. 24-
27).  Applicant stated his last "use" of marijuana was in 1994 or 1995.  This answer is 
based on his definition of "use" being a continuing or a number of inhales.  He did not 
continuously inhale when he smoked marijuana during the holiday parties in 2002, 2003 
and 2005 so he does not consider that use of marijuana (Tr. 28-33).  Applicant did not 
equate snorting a line of cocaine at a party to use of cocaine.  He stated that such an 
act was drug experimentation or involvement (Tr. 34-40).  Applicant and Department 
Counsel had the following exchange: 
 
 A. "Now if you don't like what I'm saying as far as the words "use" 
or "experimental" than that lays somewhere else.  But it is not consistent.  
It does not make sense with my history of working, my history of being 
able to take a drug test and pass.  But when I tell you my extent, it's made 
out to be--and again bad judgment, but it seems to me that that cannot be 
accepted when in fact that only after it took the poly that in my mind again 
during that time and it was wrong, bad judgment.  But then again that's 
what it was, only a taste, just to say "Okay, I'm part of the crowd, part of 
the group."  Bad judgment I agree. 
 
 Afterwards, after the party, in my mind based on that, any 
involvement, any involvement, then had to go back and fess up to any 
involvement.  Because some way you make the quantum leap from 
involvement however limited it is, to drug use and I guess that is my point, 
yes, that is my issue I'm trying to address," 
 
 Q.  when you say "Involvement" with let's say marijuana, when you 
say "involvement" are you including a taste of marijuana up to touching it 
or passing it on to someone else? 
 
 
6 
 
 A.  That's involvement. 
 
 Q. Okay.  That's involvement, that's not use. 
 
 A. That can be use. 
 
 Q. That can be use? 
 
 A. That -- involvement, is involvement. 
 
 Q.  Well, I'm trying to see what you believe in your mind is use 
versus involvement. 
 
 A.  Sir, I told you.  Let me try one more time and I'm sure where it is 
that he misunderstanding is.  You asked me about use and if I am using 
that means I am continually inhaling.  I'm continually snorting to the 
point…" (Tr. 41-42).   
 
 Applicant went on to explain that a taste of marijuana or a taste of cocaine does 
not equate to use of marijuana or cocaine.  His "taste" was bad judgment but it was not 
drug use.  It was involvement but it was not use.  Applicant admitted that the last time 
he took a puff of a marijuana cigarette or snorted a line of cocaine was between 
Christmas and New Years 2004 (Tr. 43-50).  He denied taking a puff of a marijuana 
cigarette or snorting a line of cocaine during the period between Christmas and New 
Years in 2005 because he knew he was going to be tested in February 2006.  He did 
provide $100 to provide food, alcohol, and drugs for the party (Tr. 50-53).  
 
 Based on a reading of the entire record and Applicant's testimony, I find that he is 
totally without credibility.  Based on all the information in the file, I find that Applicant 
used marijuana at various times from 1975 until late December 2005.  I find that he 
contributed funds for the purchase of marijuana until at the latest December 2005.  I find 
that he used opium in 1977 and mushrooms in 1981.  I find that he used cocaine from 
1986 until late December 2005 and purchased cocaine at least four times since 2002.  I 
find he also took prescription drugs from 2001 until February 2006 for the purpose of 
getting high and not for the purpose the drugs were prescribed by the physician.   
 
 I find Applicant provided false information that he did not use illegal drugs on his 
September 16, 1987, January 31, 1995, July 15, 2000, and December 14, 2005 security 
clearance applications.  He provided false information on his December 14, 2005 
security clearance application, when he denied using illegal drugs while holding a 
security clearance.  He provided false information to security investigators on February 
11, 2008, when he denied his past use of drugs as noted above.  I also find that a 
government agency denied him access to SCI in July 2006, that he used marijuana 
after being granted access to classified information and SCI, that he knowingly used 
marijuana and cocaine in violation of Air Force policy from 1986 until 1990, and that he 
used prescription drugs to get high and not for the intended purpose after submitting a 
security clearance application on December 14, 2005. 
 
7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  Drug 
abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24). 
 The information in the exhibits presented at the hearing by the government and 
Applicant's answers and testify and noted in my findings above are sufficient to raise 
Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug use), DI DC 
AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution), and DI DC AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.  It is clear that Applicant smoked marijuana and snorted 
cocaine as noted in the SOR.  He admitted use of opium and mushrooms, and also 
used prescription drugs to get high and not for their intended purpose of reducing pain.  
His drug-related activities are drug use for security clearance purposes and are not 
simply drug involvement or drug experimentation.  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the illegal drug use (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15).  An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government (See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Applicant has repeatedly denied that he knowingly used marijuana and cocaine.  
He equates his actions of puffing a marijuana cigarette or snorting a line of cocaine as 
either involvement or experimentation because he did not continually use either drug.  
Applicant's definition of use defies logic and is clearly erroneous.  He used the drugs as 
noted in the SOR.  I have considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) ¶ 
26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and DI MC ¶ 26(b) (a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from 
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where 
drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation).  Applicant failed to 
present any information to show that his past use of illegal drugs is unlikely to recur and 
that he no longer associates with known drug users, or now changed or avoided a drug 
use environment.  He presented no reasonable explanation for his drug-related actions.  
His only explanation is to quibble with the definition of the term "use" as opposed to his 
belief that he only was "involved" or "experimented" with illegal drugs.  He failed to 
 
9 
 
present sufficient information to meet his heavy burden of establishing that he did not 
knowingly use marijuana, opium, mushrooms, or cocaine, or prescription drugs in an 
illegal manner.  He failed to present sufficient information to show that his drug use 
does not raise questions concerning his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  I find against Applicant as to drug 
involvement under Guideline H. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.   
 
 The security clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and 
accurate information.  If a person conceals or provides false information, the security 
clearance process cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified 
information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s false 
answers to questions on his security clearance applications concerning drug use and 
his answers to security investigators raise a security concerns under Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, to determine security 
eligibility or trustworthiness); and PC DC AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false and 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security 
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative). 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  He states that his answers to questions 
on security clearance applications concerning drug use were accurate based on his 
definition of the word "use".  While there is a security concern for an omission, 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the government when applying for a security clearance, every omission, 
concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a falsification.  A falsification must be 
deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  Applicant's 
definition of drug use defies logic and so clearly erroneous that his questioning of the 
word "use" can only be to deliberately conceal his use of drugs.  I find that Applicant 
deliberately provided false information on his security applications and to security 
investigators.  
 
 I considered all of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and determine none apply.  Applicant never made a good faith effort to correct 
erroneous or inaccurate information.  He has not acknowledged that his information was 
false.  He merely argued about the definition of the word "use. 
 
10 
 
 Applicant was denied access to SCI by a government agency, he used marijuana 
and cocaine after being granted access to classified information and SCI, he violated 
the Air Force policy on drug use, and he used illegal drugs after submitting a security 
clearance application. These actions raise a security concern under PC DC AG 16(d) 
(credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and 
may not e sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which when combined 
with all available information supports a whole person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicting that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. . .).  This conduct shows questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations by 
Applicant.  I have considered the PC MC and find none apply to this conduct. His past 
conduct noted above does not establish or justify confidence that Applicant can be 
entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  I have considered the Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Conditions and find none apply to his past conduct. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 30)  Applicant violated federal law by 
knowingly and willfully providing false information on his security clearance application 
and to security investigators (18 U.S.C. § 1001).  This conduct raises Criminal Conduct 
Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) AG ¶ 31 (a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses), and CD DC AG ¶ 31 (c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted).  As noted above, Applicant provided false information repeatedly on security 
clearance applications and to security investigators.  I have considered all of the 
mitigating conditions under Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 32 and 
determine that none apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 
11 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant served 
four years on active duty in the Air Force and has held a security clearance for a 
number of years.  I considered that his employment record is good and that he has not 
tested positive for drug use.  I considered that Applicant used illegal drugs for many 
years and then lied about his use on security clearance applications and to security 
investigators.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts that 
Applicant will not use illegal drugs in the future.  I have doubts about his eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance because he repeatedly provided false information on 
his security clearance applications and to security investigators.  For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his illegal drug 
use, personal conduct, and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a to 2.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
