                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04509 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On June 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 11, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on September 11, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit (AE) 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
A through D, which were admitted without objection. One witness testified on 
Applicant’s behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 18, 
2008. 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.o by deleting the language after 
the first sentence of the allegation. There was no objection and the request was 
granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old material configuration specialist working for a federal 
contractor. She earned her associate’s degree in September 2008 through a program 
with the company she works for. She attended different colleges from 1999 through 
2004, but did not earn a degree. She did earn a certified nursing certificate.1  
 
 Applicant married in 2006 and moved from her home state to be with her 
husband. During the previous years she incurred many delinquent debts. She admitted 
she owes all of the debts in the SOR. She has not paid any of the debts.  
 
 The debt listed in SOR ¶1.a is for a car Applicant bought and then was 
repossessed. She purchased the car in 2006 for approximately $17,000. She put a 
down payment of $2,500 on the car. Her monthly payments were approximately $400. 
She never made any payments. She bought the car before she moved and took it with 
her when she moved. She has not had contact with the creditor for about two years. Her 
explanation was that she was waiting for them to contact her to tell her how much she 
owed.2  
 
 The debts listed in SOR 1.b, 1.h, and 1.k are credit card debts that total 
approximately $1,242. Applicant has not paid these creditors.3 
 
 The debts listed in SOR 1.e, 1.l, and 1.n are for cell phone services totaling 
approximately $2,657. The debts remain unpaid.4 
 
1 Tr. 24-27. 
 
2 Tr. 28-32. 
 
3 Tr. 39, 41. 
 
4 Tr. 37-38. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debts listed in SOR 1.d, 1.g, and 1.i are debts for medical services that 
Applicant incurred when she did not have insurance. They total approximately $731. 
These debts remain unpaid.5  
 
 Applicant incurred the debt in SOR 1.c when she purchased her husband’s 
wedding ring. She owes the jeweler $571 and the debt remains unpaid.6  
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.f was for damage to an apartment Applicant lived in 
before she moved. She did not pay this debt.7 
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.j was a payday loan. She owes approximately $370 and 
has not paid it. 8 
  
 The debt listed in SOR 1.m is for furniture Applicant and her friend bought when 
she lived in her home state. She was supposed to pay for half of the furniture, but she 
left the state and did not follow up on resolving the debt.9  
 
 Applicant also has approximately $15,000 in student loans. They have been 
deferred because she intends on continuing to go to school. She earns approximately 
$27,000 annually and her husband earns approximately $33,000 annually. She 
anticipates receiving a raise to $32,000 because she has now completed her training. 
She and her husband are working with a loan officer to help then find a plan to pay off 
their debts so they can buy a house as soon as they can. They hope to start a family in 
the near future. They do not have a written budget. They have not had any financial 
counseling, except through the loan officer. Applicant and her husband believe they can 
pay off her debts within a year. She believes with their two incomes they can pay her 
delinquent debts. She also admitted they are basically “living paycheck to paycheck.” 
Applicant believes she has matured in the past few years and understands her 
obligations. Applicant tithes $500 a month and will not reduce that amount.10 
  
 Applicant’s husband testified on her behalf and stated they both have stable jobs 
and they are trying to do different things to get credit “where it needs to be.” He stated, 
“So we’re just really trying to get in the process of starting a family now and in the 
process of actually trying to get a house and just trying to do what we need to do to get 
this situation resolved.” He believes they can get the situation resolved in less than a 
year.  They have been hindered from resolving their debts because there were two 
5 Tr. 33-35. 
 
6 Tr. 35-36. 
 
7 Tr. 36-37. 
 
8 Tr. 39-40. 
 
9 Tr. 40-42. 
 
10 Tr. 21-22, 44-65, 68. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
deaths in the family in 2007 and they had to travel back home for the services. All of the 
plans on how to resolve their debts are in the planning stages, nothing has been acted 
upon.11 
  
 Applicant offered statements from friends and her pastor who believe she is a 
trustworthy and honorable person. Her pastor considers her dependable and 
responsible to her obligations at church.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
11 Tr. 72-74. 
 
12 AE A, B, C, and D. 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Appellant has 
many delinquent debts and has not paid any of them. She moved in 2006 and left her 
debts behind her. She has made no arrangements to contact creditors nor has she 
made even a nominal effort to pay even the smallest of her delinquent debts. I find both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising form financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶20 (a) (“The behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death , divorce, or separation”), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (‘the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has many debts that are delinquent and she has made no effort to pay 
them. I find (a) does not apply. Applicant did not offer any evidence that the debts were 
 
6 
 
 
due to circumstances that were beyond her control. She did testify that she incurred 
some medical debts when she was uninsured, but did not offer any evidence that she 
acted responsibly. She also had two deaths in the family, but they happened in 2007 
and many of her debts were before then. She has not presented any evidence that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. I find (b) does not apply. Applicant has 
been working with a loan officer to help manage her debts so she and her husband can 
buy a house. I do not find this is the type of financial counseling necessary to assist her 
in resolving her financial problems and there are not any substantive tangible 
indications the problem is being resolved. Applicant testified of things she was planning 
on doing or talking about doing in the future, but has not done anything at present. 
Applicant has not initiated a good faith effort to pay her creditors or to resolve her debts. 
I find (c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has numerous debts that 
she left behind her when she moved and married. She stated she is now mature and 
responsible, but has not begun any payment plans or otherwise initiated repayment or 
resolution of any of the debts. She has not sought constructive financial counseling, but 
rather is working with a loan officer to help her with her credit so she can buy a house. 
She does not have a budget and although she and her husband have discussed plans 
to pay the debts, they do not have a substantive process to do so, nor has she taken 
any steps to pay any of the debts. Applicant has not acted responsibly and her inaction 
toward her debts raises questions about her reliability and good judgment. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
