 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04066 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeffrey Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 10, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was alleged to 
be indebted to 19 creditors in the approximate amount of $22,060, raising concerns 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations. He also had a 2007 traffic citation that 
raised security concerns under the guideline for Personal Conduct. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns, but mitigated the Personal 
Conduct concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 26, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 20, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 23, 2012, scheduling the hearing for February 9, 
2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 
through GE 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for Applicant to submit exhibits and on February 29, 
2012 Applicant presented a 56 page email that I have marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A 
through AE G. Department Counsel had no objections to Applicant’s post-hearing 
documents and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on February 16, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.s. He denied SOR allegation 
2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. From 1989 through 
2001, he served in the Navy, achieving the rank of E-5. He then worked for various 
government contractors. He has worked for his current employer since 2007.  He held a 
security clearance since joining the Navy in 1989. He is divorced and has two children, 
ages 15 and 22. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27, 30-37.) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports from February 8, 2008; March 9, 2009; November 18, 
2010; and August 16, 2011; and his answers to interrogatories, show that Applicant was 
indebted to 19 creditors in the amount of $22,060 as alleged on the SOR. (GEs 1-8.)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a series of events beyond his 
control. In 2003, after 14 years of marriage, Applicant learned that his wife was cheating 
on him and wanted a divorce. He was served divorce papers on Christmas Eve of 2003. 
They divorced in 2004. Applicant was required to pay both alimony and child support as 
part of the divorce decree. Unbeknownst to Applicant, his ex-wife continued to incur 
debts in his name after their divorce. Further, in 2005 through 2008, Applicant’s son 
underwent a series of surgeries on his eyes. Applicant was paying a lot to cover the 
medical bills and the other bills “slipped through the cracks.” (Tr. 26-30, 38-41, 69-70.) 
 
In 2008, when Applicant became aware of his outstanding debts, he contacted a 
credit management company to assist him in the repayment of his accounts. He testified 
he contested the debts that he believed were opened by his wife in his name after the 
divorce and plans to make payments on his other delinquent account. He has been 
working with the debt management company since July 2009. He has an installment 
payment plan managed by the company and made his agreed upon payment of 
between $292 and $276 every month, with the exception of his May 2010 payment, 
which was declined due to insufficient funds. He indicated he satisfied ten accounts 
through the debt management company, although none of the satisfied debts were 
accounts listed in the SOR. He intends to continue working with the debt management 
company to satisfy his remaining delinquent accounts. He indicated that the debt 
 
3 
 
management company has provided him with financial counseling. (AE D; Tr. 27-30, 41-
45, 73-75.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a cell phone account opened by his ex-wife in the 
approximate amount of $200, as alleged in SOR 1.a. Applicant testified he listed this 
debt with the credit management company. However, documentation from the credit 
management company failed to list this account. This debt remains unresolved. (AE D; 
Tr. 58-59.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on credit card debt in the approximate amount of $562, as 
alleged in SOR 1.b. He testified that this account was for a corporate credit card. The 
account became delinquent in 2009 when his company was slow to reimburse him for 
payments and he incurred late fees. The company policy required Applicant to pay the 
late fees, but he could not afford to do so at that time. Applicant claimed he listed this 
debt with the credit management company. However, documentation from the credit 
management company failed to list this account.  This debt is listed on Applicant’s most 
recent credit report as an unpaid collection account. This debt remains unresolved. (AE 
C; Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a co-payment on a medical debt in the approximate 
amount of $360, as alleged in SOR 1.c. Applicant incurred this debt when his ex-wife 
failed to pay the co-payment for their son’s treatment. He testified that this debt was 
satisfied through the debt management company. He presented documentation from 
the debt management company that shows Applicant satisfied two debts with this 
creditor. However, Applicant had three delinquent accounts with this creditor. The 
satisfied accounts with the creditor bear different account numbers than the present 
debt. This debt is still listed on Applicant’s most recent credit report and remains unpaid. 
(AE B; AE C; Tr. 60.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a cable-television bill in the approximate amount of 
$131, as alleged in SOR 1.d. Applicant incurred this debt when his ex-wife moved and 
failed to satisfy the debt. This debt is listed on Applicant’s most recent credit report as 
an unpaid collection account. Applicant listed this creditor with the debt collection 
company. However, it appears from the credit report that Applicant had more than one 
account with this creditor. This account is still listed on Applicant’s most recent credit 
report as an unpaid collection account. (AE C; AE D; Tr. 61.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a gas bill in the approximate amount of $180, as alleged 
in SOR 1.e. Applicant’s name was still on the account after he moved out of his 
residence with his ex-wife. He testified that he contested this debt with the credit 
reporting agencies. However, documentation from the debt management company fails 
to list this account as one they are attempting to manage for Applicant. Applicant 
indicated in his post-hearing submission that he contested this debt with the credit 
reporting agencies and that it no longer appears on his credit report. He failed to 
present documented evidence that he disputed this debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 61-
63.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant is indebted on a telecommunications account opened by his ex-wife in 
his name after their divorce in the approximate amount of $470, as alleged in SOR 1.f. 
He testified that he contested this debt with the credit reporting agencies and it has 
been removed from his credit report. He failed to present documented evidence that he 
disputed this debt. (AE A; AE C; Tr. 63.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a department store credit card in the approximate 
amount of $519, as alleged in SOR 1.g. Applicant testified he is not familiar with this 
account and reported that he has contested this debt with the credit reporting agencies. 
It no longer appears on his credit report. He failed to present documented evidence that 
he disputed this debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 63-64.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a department store credit card in the approximate 
amount of $1,011, as alleged in SOR 1.h. Applicant testified that he listed this account 
with the debt management company. He provided evidence that this account is listed 
with the credit management company, but that repayment is currently “inactive.” (AE D; 
Tr. 64.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a gas company in the approximate amount of $170, as 
alleged in SOR 1.i. Applicant testified that he listed this account with the debt 
management company. However, documentation from the debt management company 
failed to identify this account as one they are managing. Applicant indicated in his post-
hearing submission that he contested this debt with the credit reporting agencies and 
that it no longer appears on his credit report. He failed to present documented evidence 
that he disputed this debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 65.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a repossessed vehicle in the approximate amount of 
$12,803, as alleged in SOR 1.j. Applicant became delinquent on his vehicle in 2006. 
This debt is not listed in the documentation from the debt management company as an 
account they are managing. He presented no documentation that he has disputed this 
account. It remains unsatisfied. (AE A; AE D; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a department store credit card in the approximate 
amount of $324, as alleged in SOR 1.k. Applicant only found about this debt after his 
divorce, but he testified he has not contested this account. He testified he listed this 
account with the debt management firm for repayment. However, documentation from 
the debt management firm fails to verify this claim. Applicant, in his post-hearing 
submission, claims this debt was deleted from his most recent credit report after he 
disputed it. He failed to present documented evidence that he disputed this debt. (AE A; 
AE D; 65-66.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to an attorney in the approximate amount of $4,371 as 
alleged in SOR 1.l. He has been delinquent on this account since 2004. He knew he 
owed the attorney money, but he did not follow up with his divorce attorney to find out 
how much he owed. He provided evidence that this account is listed with the credit 
management company, but that repayment is currently “inactive.” (AE D; Tr. 67-68.) 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant is indebted to city court in the approximate amount of $250, as alleged 
in SOR 1.m. Applicant testified that this debt was for his ex-wife’s speeding ticket. He 
claimed it appeared on his credit report because they were married at the time of 
offense. Applicant claimed he contested this debt and it has been removed from his 
credit report. It does not appear on his most recent report of credit. However, he failed 
to present documented evidence that he disputed this debt. (AE C; Tr. 68-69.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a medical bill in the approximate amount of $206, as 
alleged in SOR 1.n. Applicant testified that this debt was for his son’s treatment. 
Applicant, in his post-hearing submission, claims this debt was deleted from his most 
recent credit report after he disputed it. He failed to present documented evidence that 
he disputed this debt. (Tr. 69-70.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a bank in the approximate amount of $166, as alleged in 
SOR 1.o. Applicant testified he listed this debt with the credit management company. 
He provided evidence that this account is listed with the credit management company, 
but that repayment is currently “inactive.” Applicant, in his post-hearing submission, 
claims this debt was deleted from his most recent credit report after he disputed it. 
However, he failed to present documented evidence that he disputed this debt. (AE A; 
AE C; AE D; Tr. 70.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on his daughter’s afterschool care in the approximate 
amount of $130, as alleged in SOR 1.p. His ex-wife put the account in his name and 
then failed to satisfy the debt. He testified he has contested this debt, but presented no 
evidence substantiating his claim. (Tr. 70-71.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a telecommunications bill placed with a collection agent 
in the approximate amount of $99, as alleged in SOR 1.q. Applicant testified that he has 
no knowledge of this account. He testified he contested this debt with the credit 
reporting agencies. Applicant, in his post-hearing submission, claims this debt was 
deleted from his most recent credit report after he disputed it. He failed to present 
documented evidence that he disputed this debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 71.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a medical account in the approximate amount of $74, as 
alleged in SOR 1.r. Applicant did not know how this debt was incurred. He testified that 
he will make sure it is listed with the credit management company. Applicant, in his 
post-hearing submission, claims this debt was deleted from his most recent credit report 
after he disputed it. He failed to present documented evidence that he disputed this 
debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 72.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collections account in the approximate amount of $34, 
as alleged in SOR 1.s. Applicant testified that he has no knowledge of this account. He 
contested this debt with the credit reporting agencies. Applicant, in his post-hearing 
submission, claims this debt was deleted from his most recent credit report after he 
disputed it. However, he failed to present documented evidence that he disputed this 
debt. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 72.) 
 
 
6 
 
On August 10, 2007, Applicant was charged with Driving on a Suspended 
license, Disobeying Official Traffic Control Device, and Registration Required. On 
October 18, 2007, he was also charged with Failure to Appear, and a warrant was 
issued for his arrest. On December 31, 2009, Applicant was found guilty of Driving on a 
Suspended License and the other charges were dismissed. He was fined $228.50. 
Applicant satisfied the fine on January 3, 2011, as evidenced by the minutes of the 
court. (AE E; Tr. 29-30, 73) 
 
Applicant is well respected by a co-worker, and his project manager, who each 
wrote letters of support on Applicant’s behalf. Both indicate Applicant is a responsible 
individual. His project manager stated Applicant “is an asset to any organization, and 
[he] is happy to provide [his] wholehearted endorsement.” (AE F.) Applicant’s military 
records indicate he was awarded two Good Conduct Medals during his Navy service. 
He also testified that he received two Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals. (AE 
A; AE G; Tr. 33.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 
7 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) Inability of unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2004 through 2009, Applicant accumulated a significant amount of 
delinquent debt. During that period, he failed to adequately address his debts. While he 
may not have known about some of the debts incurred in his name by his ex-wife, he 
was aware of other debts, like his bill owed to his attorney for his divorce. In July 2009, 
he started working with a credit management company to address some, but not all, of 
his delinquent accounts. Despite the assistance of the credit management company, he 
has failed to adequately address any of the debts listed on the SOR in over two-and-a-
half years since enlisting its help. He has a long history of failing to meet his financial 
obligations. The Government established a prima facie case for disqualification under 
Guideline F. 
 
8 
 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are recent and on-going. He has failed to satisfy 
any of the debts listed on the SOR. While some of the debts no longer appear on his 
most recent credit report, he failed to present evidence that they were removed due to 
his disputes and not due to the passage of time. Applicant’s most recent credit report 
(AE C) added little weight to his claims, since there was more than one plausible 
explanation for the absence of debts from the credit report.  
The Appeal Board has previously noted that it is reasonable for a Judge to 
expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts.1  
At least some of the debts Applicant identified as not being on the credit report were 
nevertheless acknowledged by Applicant during the hearing as being both legitimate 
and unsatisfied. Further, the Board recognized that debts remain relevant for the 
purpose of security purposes even if they could not “be legally listed on a credit report 
after the passage of seven years.”2   
 
                                                          
1 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17520 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 20, 2007). 
2 ISCR 98-0111 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 1998); See also ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006). 
 
9 
 
While some of Applicant’s debts may have been incurred through circumstances 
beyond his control such as a dishonest ex-wife and the unexpected medical treatment 
of his son, other debts like his attorney bill became delinquent due to his failure to act 
responsibly. While he has paid some delinquent debts absent from the SOR through the 
debt management company that he has been working with for the past two years, he 
has failed to list all of his delinquent accounts for repayment with them. He has failed to 
show that he is acting responsibly with respect to his debts listed on the SOR, or that 
these debts are under control or otherwise resolved. He is still delinquent on all $22,060 
of debt listed on the SOR. None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant exercised poor judgment in his August 2007 driving decisions which 
lead to charges of Driving on a Suspended License, Disobeying Official Traffic Control 
Device, and failure to produce his registration when required. He continued to use poor 
judgment when he failed to appear on his appointed court date. As a result of the 
charges against him, he was fined $228.50, which he failed to pay until January 2011. 
AG ¶ 16(c) is applicable as a disqualifying condition. Applicant demonstrated 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, in both committing and failing to adequately address 
these offenses. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
is potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
10 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Applicant’s offenses were minor. Further, he has not committed similar offenses 
since this incident in 2007. While he exercised poor judgment in failing to pay his fine 
until 2011, he has now satisfied the debt. Future offenses are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s future trustworthiness. Those that know him best speak 
highly of his character. He can be trusted to comply with laws and regulations in the 
future. AG ¶ 17(c) is mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his project manager and co-worker. He performs 
well at his job. However, he has $22,060 worth of debt that he has failed to adequately 
address. While Applicant has worked with a debt management firm for the past two 
years, and is making slow progress towards resolving his delinquent accounts, he has 
not documented enough progress to mitigate the Government’s concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
However, he has mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
