 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 12-03331
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant accrued more than $20,000 in delinquent debt due to periods of
unemployment and uninsured medical expenses. She was also arrested and convicted
for grand theft from her employer. Applicant has not timely acted to resolve her financial
problems, and is currently unable to pay most of the debts alleged in the SOR. Although
Applicant recently sought credit counseling, she has not established a repayment plan
or budget. Her financial problems are likely to recur, and her request for a position of
trust is denied.
Statement of the Case 
On December 13, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.2
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by the Directive, as amended.3
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were4
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Also, an index listing each exhibit is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. See Tr. 24 - 34. 5
 Tr. 35 - 43.6
2
investigation, which included her responses to Department of Defense (DOD)
interrogatories,  DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent2
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  3
On September 17, 2013, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). On December4
16, 2013, Department Counsel amended the SOR to add a single allegation of fact
under the AG for personal conduct (Guideline E).
Applicant timely answered the SOR and the amendment, and she requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2013, and I convened a
hearing in this matter on January 21, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 7, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified and5
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - E, which were admitted without objection.6
DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2014. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that in August 2006, Applicant was
arrested and convicted of felony grand theft after she, as a store cashier, allowed
customers she knew to take merchandise for which they had not paid, and that she
knowingly cashed bad checks (SOR 1.a); and that she owed $21,070 for 24 unpaid
debts (SOR 1.b - 1.y). Applicant denied SOR 1.b, 1.d - 1.f, 1.h - 1.k, 1.u, and 1.w. She
admitted the remaining allegations under this guideline.
Under Guideline E, the Government cross-alleged as disqualifying personal
conduct, the arrest alleged at SOR 1.a (SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted this allegation.
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed
Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 39 years old and is employed by a defense contractor for work that
requires access to sensitive automated information to perform her duties as a customer
service representative. She was raised in State A and graduated from high school there
in 1993. She attended college in that state until December 1999, but did not receive a
degree. She moved to State B seeking work in 2005, and she finished her education by
3
taking on-line courses between May 2007 and January 2010. She graduated magna
cum laude. She is the single mother of three children, ages 17, 11, and 9, who live with
her. She receives $480 each month in child support from the father of her two younger
children. Applicant moved to her current residence, in State C, in February 2011. (Gx. 1
and 2; Tr. 35 - 36)
Applicant’s 11-year-old child has suffered from chronic asthma since about age
3, requiring several emergency room visits not fully covered by insurance. The debts
alleged at SOR 1.e - 1.i, 1.k, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r, 1.v, and 1.y total $5,380. They are unpaid
accounts stemming from this child’s medical condition. Before 2012, Applicant relied on
Medicaid for her family’s medical expenses. (Gx. 2; Tr. 44, 49)
From November 1999 until March 2003, Applicant worked as a customer service
representative in call centers for two different retail companies, both of which closed
and left her unemployed. She found similar work between May 2003 and February
2004, when she left during a difficult pregnancy of her youngest child. She returned to
work as a customer service representative in November 2004. But she left that job to
care for her middle child, when his asthma was first diagnosed. In October 2005,
Applicant began working two part-time jobs as a cashier at large retail stores. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Tr. 49 - 50)
On August 21, 2006, Applicant was arrested at one of her part-time jobs. Security
personnel there had observed that, on more than one occasion, Applicant was “under
ringing” merchandise; that is, she did not scan or account for some items that persons
she knew were presenting at Applicant’s cash register. She was also found to have
cashed bad checks at her register for an acquaintance, who used the proceeds to buy
store gift cards redeemable for merchandise. The total value of checks and
merchandise was $2,663.15. Applicant pleaded guilty to felony grand theft and was
placed on probation for three years. She also was fined and ordered to pay about
$2,600 in restitution. Applicant was released early from probation, and she has since
had the record of her arrest sealed. (Answer; Gx.1; Gx. 2; Gx. 6; Gx. 7; Tr. 62 - 69, 74 -
77)
After her arrest and conviction, Applicant was unemployed until November 2007,
when she was hired by a patient transport company. She held that job until February
2011, when she moved to State B after her release from probation and completion of
her college degree. While working in patient transport, she was responsible for
safeguarding patient information and medical records. Applicant was hired by her
current employer in December 2012. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. C; Tr. 50)
Applicant’s uneven employment record and unexpected medical expenses have
contributed to her financial problems. The Government’s information corroborates the
debts alleged in SOR 1.b - 1.y. Some of her debts have been delinquent since 2007 and
2008.  When Applicant filled out her EQIP in December 2011, she disclosed many of
the debts alleged in the SOR. She had examined her credit report before she completed
the EQIP and became aware of the scope of her delinquencies. In January 2012,
Applicant was subsequently interviewed by a Government investigator about her
financial problems. Thereafter, Applicant made calls to some of her creditors but quickly
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 7
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 8
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 9
 Directive. 6.3.10
4
learned they would demand more than she could pay even in settlement. (Answer; Gx.
1 - 5; Tr. 51 - 52)
Applicant did nothing further about her debts until November 2013. She
contracted with a credit counseling organization to examine her credit report, validate
which debts are properly attributable to her, and eventually assist her in negotiating a
repayment plan. As of the hearing, this process, for which Applicant is paying $40
monthly, had not yet resulted in any successful disputes or in a repayment plan. (Ax. A;
Tr. 53 - 56)
In July 2013, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) in
response to DOD interrogatories. The PFS reflected a $48 net remainder after
expenses each month. Applicant’s expenses did not include the $40 credit counseling
fee begun in January 2014. The PFS also did not reflect any debt payments or that she
also owes about $28,000 in federal and private student loans that are currently in
forbearance due to financial hardship. (Gx. 2; Tr. 56 - 60, 72 - 73)
Applicant has established a good reputation in her current workplace and among
her friends and coworkers for honesty and reliability. Two personal references with
detailed knowledge of Applicant’s arrest and her financial problems support her eligibility
for a position of trust. (Ax. C)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In7
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also8
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.9
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,10
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
5
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial
The Government’s information and Applicant’s admissions in response to the
SOR, are sufficient to support the allegations in the SOR. The facts thereby established
raised a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant has been experiencing financial problems characterized by chronic
delinquent debt for several years. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are still
unresolved, and Applicant does not have the means to do so. Her arrest in 2006 for
grand theft from her employer is a crime that bears directly on Applicant’s unwillingness
or inability to act as a fiduciary when it comes to handling and protecting sensitive
information. All of this requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as
 AG ¶ 20(f) (the affluence resulted from a legal source of income) has no relevance to these facts and11
circumstances.
6
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust). 
I have also considered the following pertinent mitigating conditions under at AG ¶
20:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.11
Because Applicant’s debts are still not resolved and have been present for several
years, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Granted, Applicant’s finances have been adversely
impacted by lapses in employment and her child’s medical condition. However, some of
her unemployment was due to her arrest for grand theft in 2006. Also, Applicant has
had at least two years to try to resolve her debts in good faith, or to seek credit
counseling, or to take other responsible action regarding her financial problems. AG ¶¶
20(b) and (c) do not apply.
Applicant has only recently sought professional help through credit counseling.
Any benefit she might take from AG ¶ 20(d) is greatly reduced by her failure to act
sooner. Also, she has not presented any information in support of any disputes she may
have about the validity of her debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.
Applicant’s finances are not likely to improve in the near future. She is obligated
to begin repaying significant student loan debt, and her credit counseling efforts have
not yet shown that any of the debts alleged are invalid. On balance, Applicant has failed
to mitigate the security concerns about her history of indebtedness.
7
Personal Conduct
Available information is sufficient to support the allegation under this guideline.
The facts established raise a security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct that
is addresses at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, Applicant’s arrest and conviction for grand theft from her employer in
2006 requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c):
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
As criminal conduct, Applicant’s 2006 arrest would be mitigated as isolated and
remote in time. However, these facts require application of AG ¶ 16(c) because
Applicant’s conduct undermines the Government’s ability to trust that she will act in a
fiduciary capacity in safeguarding sensitive information.
I have also considered the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.
Applicant completed her probation early and, while on probation, advanced
herself by completing her college education with honors. Her first job after she was
arrested required that she protect the personal and medical information of her
company’s clients.  Her arrest was not minor, but it was an isolated event and occurred
more than seven years ago. The security concerns under this guideline are mitigated.
8
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I also have reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 39-year-
old single mother. She has experienced several challenges, some of her own doing, as
she has raised her three children. Applicant appeared sincere in her desire to resolve
her financial problems, and she was remorseful over her arrest in 2006. Her personal
and professional associates are aware of the adverse information in her background;
regardless, they recommend her for a position of trust.  Unfortunately, Applicant’s
financial problems place her in an untenable situation. She is only marginally able to
meet her current expenses, and there is little likelihood she will be able to make any
meaningful progress in resolving her debts in the near future. These facts and
circumstances sustain the Government’s concerns about the possibility she might resort
to inappropriate conduct to obtain money. A fair and commonsense assessment of all of
the available information shows that Applicant has not resolved all of the doubts about
her suitability for access to sensitive information. Because protection of the national
interest is the primary concern here, those doubts must be resolved against the
individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.y: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to have access to sensitive automated information.
Request for a position of trust is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
