 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-08300 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a decision on the administrative (written) record without a hearing. 
 
 On March 16, 2018, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant material 
(FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant nine exhibits, pre-
marked Items 1 – 9, which the Government offers for admission into the record. Applicant 
submitted a Response to the FORM. With his Response, Applicant submitted a number 
of documents for the record. Applicant’s Response and the accompanying documents 
were collectively marked Item 10. The exhibits offered by the parties, Items 1 – 10, are 
admitted into the record without objection. 
 
 On June 13, 2018, I was assigned the case. Subsequently, I received written 
confirmation that Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance and reopened the 
record to provide the parties an opportunity to supplement the record and confirm 
Applicant’s forum choice. Applicant confirmed he wanted a decision on the written record 
 
2 
without the benefit of a hearing and submitted Items 11 and 12, which were admitted into 
the record without objection. The record closed on July 9, 2018. See Appellate Exhibits I 
and II. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 61, is single, but has shared a home with his cohabitant since 2012. He 
has three children, ranging in ages from 11 through 24. He has been employed as a 
federal contractor for nearly 20 years, and was hired by his current employer in 2017. He 
has held a security clearance since approximately 2000. 
 
Applicant began experiencing financial trouble about 10 years ago with the 
unexpected birth of his second child. He hired a debt consolidation firm to help him settle 
and pay his debts, but the firm failed to live up to his expectations and purportedly 
exacerbated his financial problems.  
 
In 2012, Applicant was diagnosed with cancer. Shortly thereafter, about the time 
Applicant started chemotherapy, his employer laid him off. He was unemployed until 
2015.  
 
Applicant has incurred over $45,000 in delinquent debt, including a 2015 state tax 
lien for $8,200 (SOR 1.a); approximately $15,000 in judgments, some of which date back 
to 2008 (SOR 1.c – 1.e); and $23,000 for a charged-off second mortgage (SOR 1.f). 
Applicant also admits that his primary mortgage is past-due (SOR 1.j), and that he has 
accumulated an additional $4,600 in delinquent debt (SOR 1.g, 1.k – 1.m, 1.o, and 1.p).  
 
After receiving the SOR, Applicant negotiated a payment plan to resolve his state 
tax debt and accepted a settlement offer to pay off the charged-off second mortgage 
account. He provided documentation with his Response, Item 10, showing that his 2016 
federal tax refund ($500) was intercepted and applied against his outstanding state tax 
debt; the balance on his state tax debt is down to $8,000; and he made one payment 
consistent with the settlement agreement to resolve the second-mortgage account. He 
claims to have continued making the monthly payments to resolve the state tax debt and 
second-mortgage account, but did not provide documentation to corroborate his claims.  
 
In April 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to relevant questions about his financial record, Applicant did not report the 
state tax lien and his delinquent accounts. In his Answer, Applicant explained that his 
failure to report was due to memory loss and other significant side from the cancer 
treatment. However, when initially confronted in July 2017 about his failure to report the 
state tax lien and other delinquencies, Applicant purportedly told a clearance investigator 
that he had not looked at his credit report in years and does not like discussing his poor 
financial situation. (Item 4 at 6.) Applicant denies deliberately falsifying his SCA.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
 
3 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
DOHA administrative judges “are creatures of the Directive,”1 who derive their 
authority from the Directive. The Directive also sets forth an administrative judge’s 
responsibilities and obligations, including the requirement that a judge remain fair and 
impartial, and carefully balance the needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the 
demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: 
(a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 
12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).2 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 17-01213, n. 2 (App. Bd. June 29, 2018). 
 
2 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
4 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Conduct involving dishonesty during the security clearance process, such as the 
deliberate falsification of a security clearance application, raises a serious security 
concern. See generally AG ¶¶ 15, 16(a). Notwithstanding the apparent inconsistency 
between Applicant’s explanation for not listing his state tax lien and other delinquent 
accounts on his SCA, I credit Applicant’s later innocent explanation for the omission. This 
later explanation is reasonable, plausible, and consistent with the record evidence. 
Notably, in reviewing the SCA, Applicant omitted other material information that would 
generally be considered favorable, such as when he initially was granted a security 
clearance. Applicant’s cancer treatment clearly had discernible side effects, leaving him 
unable to accurately recall and understand some of the information requested in the SCA. 
Accordingly, the Guideline E allegation is decided for Applicant.3  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. See AG ¶ 18. 
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 11-
05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  
                                                          
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (judge erred in rejecting applicant’s 
plausible explanation in finding against him under Guideline E). See also ISCR Case No. 15-06990 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 11, 2018) (reversing adverse Guideline E decision). 
 
5 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not meant to punish a person for past poor 
financial decisions. Furthermore, persons applying for a security clearance are not 
required to be debt free, or have unblemished financial records, or a certain credit score. 
However, they are expected to present evidence mitigating security concerns raised by 
the presence of delinquent debt and showing that they manage their present finances in 
a manner expected of all clearance holders.4  
 
Additionally, a person who fails to timely file or pay his or her taxes, a basic and 
fundamental financial obligation of all citizens, bears a heavy burden in mitigating the 
financial considerations security concern.5 An administrative judge should closely 
examine the circumstances giving rise to a person’s tax-related issues and his or her 
response to it. A judge must also carefully scrutinize a person’s claim of financial reform 
and weigh it against the person’s lack of judgment and reliability in failing to timely file his 
or her income tax returns or pay their taxes.6  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. His medical condition 
and loss of employment exacerbated his already poor financial situation. However, he 
has been gainfully employed since 2015 and only after the SOR was issued did he begin 
to take action to resolve his past-due accounts. Moreover, a number of the judgment 
debts referenced in the SOR predate the matters beyond his control that negatively 
impacted his finances. Although Applicant receives some credit in mitigation for belatedly 
                                                          
4 See generally ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues). 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 14-05794 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016); 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016); ISCR Case No. 12-09545 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015). 
 
6 
taking action to resolve his state tax debt and the charged-off second mortgage account, 
the evidence he provided is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his still 
unpaid tax debt and the other delinquent accounts.7  
 
Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 
20(g) have some limited applicability, but are insufficient, even when considered with the 
favorable whole-person matters raised by the evidence,8 to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts 
about Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information.9 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g, 1.j – 1.m, 1.o, 1.p:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h, 1.i, 1.n, 1.q:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:              For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01382 (App. Bd. May 16, 2018) (reversing favorable decision because, in 
part, applicant took remedial action only after being placed on notice clearance was in jeopardy).   
 
8 See generally AG ¶ 2. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of holding a security clearance and the 
other matters he referenced in Item 12.  
 
9 I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C, including whether the grant of a clearance 
subject to additional security measures would sufficiently mitigate the security concerns at issue (such as, 
submission of regular reports to a security manager demonstrating continued payments and other 
responsible action to address past-due debts, as well as submission of credit reports and other 
documentation reflecting continued financial stability). However, Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to warrant application of any of the exceptions in Appendix C. 
