 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-02117 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph E. Schmitz, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by her connection to and contact with family in Iran. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the foreign preference and foreign 
influence guidelines.1 Applicant submitted an initial and a supplemental answer to the 
SOR on April 17, 2017 and December 23, 2017, respectively (collectively referred to as 
the “Answer”). She requested a hearing and, by agreement of the parties, the hearing 
was scheduled for February 22, 2018. 
 
 The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant and her character witness 
testified. The exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the record without 
objection.2 The transcript of the hearing was received on March 5, 2018. 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel later amended the SOR by withdrawing allegations 2(a)(1) and 2(a)(2). Appellate 
Exhibit (App. Exh. I).  
 
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 5; Applicant’s Exhibits A – F. Correspondence, parties index of exhibits, and 
other such non-substantive matters are attached to the record as App. Exh. II – V.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 32, was born in Iran. At age 15, she entered into an arranged marriage. 
Her husband was a decade older than her and a dual U.S.-Iranian citizen. They moved 
to the United States in 2000. Applicant graduated from high school in 2003 and earned 
an undergraduate degree from a U.S. college in 2006. She also became a U.S. citizen in 
2006. She obtained an order of protection from her abusive ex-husband in 2008, and they 
divorced a year later. Since the divorce, Applicant has started her professional career, 
working for a federal contractor since 2012; purchased a home; and recently moved in 
with her partner, a successful businessman who has worked in the U.S. intelligence 
community for years.  
 
 Applicant is actively involved in her community through a number of social and 
sports clubs. At work, she has been recognized for her exemplary work and has been 
granted a position of trust to work on several U.S. Government projects. She estimates 
her home is worth approximately $600,000, and she has about $200,000 in equity. In 
addition, she has about $50,000 in savings and a 401(k) retirement account through her 
employer. She holds no assets or properties outside the United States, though she briefly 
contemplated several years ago purchasing an investment property in Iran.3 
 
 In May 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. She reported 
her dual citizenship, possession of an Iranian passport, her Iranian relatives, and her 
travel to Iran to visit relatives. A month later, she discussed her Iranian ties with a security 
clearance investigator.4  
 
In June 2014, Applicant was sent an SOR alleging similar security concerns as the 
present SOR. In the 2014 SOR, Applicant’s possession of an Iranian passport and her 
vote in an Iranian election were cited to as raising a foreign preference security concern. 
DOHA thereafter lost jurisdiction over the matter.5  
 
In 2016, Applicant renewed her Iranian passport to facilitate her travel to Iran to 
visit her parents. Iran does not recognize dual citizenship and requires all U.S.-Iranian 
dual nationals to enter and exit Iran on Iranian passports.6 Applicant understands that 
without an Iranian passport she cannot enter Iran, not even to visit her parents. However, 
she is willing to surrender the passport and renounce her Iranian citizenship.7  
 
                                                          
3 Transcript (Tr.) 17, 35-39, 43-48; Exhibits 1 – 2; Exhibits A, E, F.  
 
4 Exhibits 1 – 2.  
 
5 Exhibit 3; Exhibit E. A hearing was supposedly held in March 2015, but presumably DOHA lost jurisdiction 
over the matter prior to the start of the hearing.  
 
6 Exhibit 4.  
 
7 Tr. 18-19, 33.  
 
3 
 
Applicant admits she voted in Iranian elections in 2009, but believes her vote was 
consistent with U.S. national security interests. Since then, Applicant has not voted in 
Iranian elections. She provided documentation to corroborate her testimony.8 
 
Applicant has no interest in returning to live in Iran. She notes that one of the 
irreconcilable differences with her ex-husband was his desire to return to Iran to raise a 
family.9 She testified about her lack of desire to return to live in Iran as follows:  
 
Your Honor, this whole process made me realize why I love America so 
much. . . . In Iran, women do not have divorce rights. Women cannot leave 
the country without their husband's permission. If I were still married in Iran 
. . . I basically did not have a way to escape from the physical abuse that I 
endured during my marriage. America, United States, empowered me to 
break away from the abuse and, for once, live as an individual and not feel 
like I am someone's property. Ever since my divorce, I've started enjoying 
my life, traveled the world, established myself, bought a condo. I basically 
found my happiness here. I love America. Iran, to me represents a 
repressive era of my life that I never, ever want to go back to. For me, 
America is my safe haven.10  
 
 Applicant’s parents and siblings are Iranian citizens. Applicant sponsored her 
parents for U.S. immigration purposes. Her parents hold permanent residency status in 
the United States and recently applied for U.S. citizenship. They reside about half the 
year in the United States and the other half in Iran. When in the United States, Applicant’s 
parents live with her. They are both retired and have no connection to the Iranian 
government, military, or its intelligence services. They are aware that she is applying for 
a security clearance.11 
 
 Applicant’s siblings are residents and citizens of Iran. She is sponsoring one of her 
siblings for immigration to the United States. When Applicant first immigrated to the 
United States, her contact with her siblings was fairly frequent, once a week to once a 
month by phone, email, or other electronic means. However, as time has passed, 
Applicant’s contact with her siblings has dwindled to the point that she did not visit with 
them when she last traveled to Iran and now rarely speaks with them. Her siblings have 
no connection to the Iranian government, military, or its intelligence services. They are 
not aware that Applicant is under consideration for a security clearance.12 
 
  
                                                          
8 Tr. 18-19, 40-41; Exhibits A – C. 
 
9 Tr. 24, 40-41; Exhibit C. 
 
10 Tr. 20.  
 
11 Tr. 22-30, 39; Exhibits A, B, D. 
 
12 Tr. 20-35, 41; Exhibits 1 – 4; Exhibits A, B. 
 
4 
 
Administrative Notice – The Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran) 
 
In May 2017, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) made the following official 
statement about Iran: “The Islamic Republic of Iran remains an enduring threat to US 
national interests because of Iranian support to anti-US terrorist groups and militants . . . 
and because of Iran’s development of advanced military capabilities.”13 
 
The following additional relevant facts, which are taken from official, publically-
available U.S. Government reports, are hereby accepted for administrative notice:14  
 
1. The United States and Iran do not have diplomatic relations. 
 
2. Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism. 
 
3. Individuals acting on behalf of Iran have been implicated in cyber-attacks 
against the United States.  
 
4. Iran has a poor human rights record.  
 
5. Iran’s security personnel, at times, place foreign visitors under surveillance, 
including searching personal possessions left in hotel rooms. Hotel rooms, 
telephones, computers, fax machines and other electronics may be monitored.  
 
6. The Iranian government does not recognize dual citizenship and will treat U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals as Iranian citizens subject to Iranian laws. Dual nationals 
must enter and exit Iran using an Iranian passport, and sometimes have had 
their U.S. passports confiscated and denied permission to leave Iran. U.S. 
citizens, particularly Iranian-Americans, have been unjustly detained and 
imprisoned by the Iranian government. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
                                                          
13 Exhibit 5 (DNI’s Statement for the Record, Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence 
Community).  
 
14 See generally Exhibit 5.  
 
5 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
DOHA administrative judges “are creatures of the Directive,”15 who derive their 
authority from the Directive. The Directive also sets forth an administrative judge’s 
responsibilities and obligations, including the requirement that a judge remain fair and 
impartial, and carefully balance the needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the 
demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: 
(a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 
12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).16 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 17-01213, n. 2 (App. Bd. June 29, 2018). 
 
16 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
6 
 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an applicant, 
at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines established for 
determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 A security concern arises when a person acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States. Such action may indicate that the 
person may provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the United States. 
However, foreign citizenship by itself does not raise a security concern under Guideline 
C, unless the foreign citizenship is in conflict with U.S. national security interests or the 
person attempted to conceal the information about his or her foreign citizenship. See 
generally AG ¶ 9.  
 
 Here, the Government alleges that Applicant’s exercise of foreign citizenship, 
namely, her 2009 vote for a presidential candidate, who was widely seen as a far more 
moderating force than the incumbent, indicated her purported preference for Iran over the 
United States. However, the evidence clearly dispels this allegation. Applicant reported 
her foreign connections and ties to Iran, including her possession of a foreign passport. 
She voluntarily provided her foreign passport to document her travel and 2009 vote. She 
has been upfront and candid throughout the security clearance process about her foreign 
ties, as well as her love for her adopted homeland. The overwhelming weight of the record 
evidence clearly demonstrates that Applicant holds no preference for Iran. Accordingly, 
the Guideline C allegation is decided for Applicant. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
 
7 
 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.17  
 
 In assessing the foreign influence security concern, I considered all pertinent 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, including:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with foreign relatives faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in 
mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to 
sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified 
information.”18 However, what factor or combination of factors will mitigate security 
concerns raised by an applicant with relatives in a foreign country is not easily identifiable 
                                                          
17 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
18 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
8 
 
or quantifiable.19 Furthermore, a heightened level of scrutiny is warranted when an 
applicant’s relatives with whom they have a close relationship reside in a hostile foreign 
country, such as Iran.20  
 
 Here, Applicant has a close relationship to her parents. This relationship and her 
parents’ residency in Iran for half the year raises a heightened security concern.21 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate this security concern. In reaching 
this conclusion, I considered Applicant’s compelling life story, including the strength of 
character she showed in leaving an abusive marriage; her strong professional, personal, 
and financial ties to the United States; her work as a federal contractor; and her honesty 
in reporting her foreign ties on the SCA and the candor she exhibited throughout the 
security clearance process. However, this and the other favorable record evidence are 
not enough to mitigate the serious security concern that Applicant could be subjected to 
foreign influence through her parents from a regime that is a threat to U.S. national 
security.22 However, this adverse security assessment is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such 
as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Specifically, I find that AG 7(a) and 7(b) apply. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(e) have some 
limited applicability, but are insufficient, even when considered with the favorable whole-
person matters raised by the evidence,23 to mitigate the heightened security concern at 
issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.24 
 
  
                                                          
19 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
20 The Appeal Board has consistently held that a person who has a close relationship with relatives in Iran, 
a hostile foreign power, bears a “very heavy burden” of proof and persuasion in mitigating security concerns 
raised by such foreign ties. ISCR Case No. 11-14079 at 3 (App. Bd. May 6, 2013); ISCR Case No. 10-
09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
21 See e.g. ISCR Case No. 05-02210at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 18, 2008) (serious foreign influence security 
concern raised by applicant’s close relationship to her parents who regularly travel to Iran). 
 
22 Applicant’s present relationship with her siblings is relatively weak when compared to the relationship 
she has with her parents. Although Applicant’s siblings are residents and citizens of Iran, they do not pose 
the same foreign influence concern raised by her parents. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) apply to the security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s relationship with her siblings. These mitigating factors, coupled with the 
other noted favorable record evidence, mitigates the potential foreign influence security concern raised by 
Applicant’s relationship to her siblings. Accordingly, SOR 1.b and 1.c is decided for Applicant. 
 
23 See generally AG ¶ 2.  
 
24 I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C, including whether the grant of a clearance 
subject to additional security measures would sufficiently mitigate the foreign influence security concern. 
However, in light of the heightened security concern at issue and after considering the record evidence, 
including the lack of evidence that Applicant’s employer is willing and able to monitor her compliance (and 
report any non-compliance) with security measures, I decline to exercise my discretion to apply any of the 
listed exceptions.  
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a(1) and 2.a(2):        Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a(3):    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
