 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06894 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was diagnosed in 2012 with bipolar disorder. He briefly pursued 
treatment but did not follow through with it. His bipolar diagnosis was confirmed in 
September 2017, as a result of a psychological evaluation conducted during his 
background investigation. Applicant began psychiatric treatment for his condition in 
September 2017, and his treatment continues. However, Applicant’s treatment provider 
found that his condition is unstable and his prognosis is unknown. More time is needed 
for Applicant to demonstrate ongoing and consistent compliance with his treatment plan. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline I, psychological conditions. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 23, 
2013. On November 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline I, psychological 
 
2 
 
 
conditions. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD as of June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 2017 and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on February 16, 2018. On March 23, 2018, a notice of hearing 
was issued scheduling the case for April 23, 2018. The hearing convened as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the Government submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. All exhibits were 
admitted without objection. I left the record open until May 11, 2018, to allow Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted one document, 
which was marked as AE G and admitted without objection. The record closed on May 
11, 2018. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 7, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶ 1.b. I have incorporated his 
admission into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He and his wife have been together since 2012, and they 
married in May 2016. They have a two-year-old daughter. Since August 2013, Applicant 
has worked at a naval shipyard for a defense contractor. Applicant had a security 
clearance during a prior period of service in the U.S. Marine Corps, but does not currently 
have a clearance. Applicant needs a clearance so he can perform his current duties at 
the shipyard. Applicant provided documentation of his participation in several work-
related apprenticeships and training programs. He also earned an associate’s degree and 
is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 9-10, 31-33, 38-44, 50-51; GE 1; AE D; AE E) 
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1994 to 1998, and 
then in the Marine Corps Reserve from 1998 to 2000. He tested positive for marijuana on 
multiple occasions in the Marine Corps and he disclosed in his interview that he received 
a bad conduct discharge in 2000. (Tr. 45-46; GE 3 at 3-4) His marijuana use continued 
for about a year thereafter, and he later experimented with spice at some point between 
2004 and 2012, when it was legal. (Tr. 45-46; GE 3 at 4) Applicant did not disclose any 
prior military service on his SCA. Nor did he disclose his bad conduct discharge. (GE 1 
at 17)1 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant did not disclose his prior military service, or, by extension, his bad conduct discharge, on his 
SCA. This was not alleged in the SOR as a possible independent security concern under Guideline E 
(personal conduct). I have therefore not considered it as disqualifying conduct.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In March and April 2012, following the end of a long-term relationship, Applicant 
sought mental health counseling because he was feeling depressed. He was seen by a 
board-certified family nurse practitioner. He was diagnosed with bipolar II disorder. (Tr. 
47-9; GE 2; GE 3) Applicant disclosed his mental health counseling on his SCA. (GE 1) 
 
Appellant saw his medical provider three times in spring 2012. He was prescribed 
several antidepressants, and he testified that he began to feel better. Because he began 
to feel better, he stopped going to treatment, despite his provider’s recommendations. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant testified that at the time, he did not connect the fact that his mood 
had improved with the fact that he was on effective medication. (Tr. 47-50, 56-57; GE 1, 
GE 2)  
 
In August 2015, DOD requested copies of Applicant’s medical records for review. 
This was unsuccessful, as his treatment provider had left the practice. In May 2017, DOD 
requested that Applicant undergo a psychological evaluation by an approved clinical 
psychologist provided by the Government. (GE 2) Applicant had not been on any 
medication for his condition, or been in any treatment for it, since spring 2012. (Tr. 50-52)  
 
In September 2017, Applicant was evaluated by a Ph.D. clinical psychologist for a 
determination if he “has any mental, emotional, or personality conditions that could impair 
judgment, reliability or trustworthiness.” (GE 3 at 1) That evaluation confirmed Applicant’s 
bipolar II diagnosis. The evaluator also confirmed that Applicant’s condition “could result 
in episodes of impaired judgment, reliability or trustworthiness.” (GE 3 at 1)  
 
The evaluator noted that Applicant has a history of impulsivity, substance abuse, 
and mildly antisocial traits for much of his adult life. His substance abuse history includes 
abuse of marijuana, as noted above. Applicant was diagnosed during the evaluation with 
cannabis disorder, mild, in sustained remission. (GE 3 at 4) 
 
The evaluator also noted Applicant’s history of alcohol use and binge drinking. In 
recent years, his alcohol use has lessened. However, in fall 2017, he continued to 
consume alcohol at a rate of 12 beers a week. He occasionally consumed six or more 
drinks at a sitting. The evaluator recommended that Applicant eliminate or curtail his 
alcohol use given his history, and because “his occasional binge drinking is unhealthy.” 
He was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder, mild, in sustained remission.2 (GE 3 at 4) 
 
The evaluator noted that the hypomanic episodes resulting from Applicant’s 
condition “could easily be prevented with appropriate medication” and that Applicant was 
willing to pursue treatment. (GE 3 at 1) She also noted Applicant’s history of alcohol and 
cannabis use disorders, both in sustained remission. She recommended that he eliminate 
all binge drinking for the sake of his security clearance and that he cut his overall alcohol 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s substance abuse history was not alleged in the SOR. However, that history was duly 
considered by the medical professionals as part of their analysis of Applicant’s mental health. I have 
considered that history accordingly. 
 
4 
 
 
consumption to “half or less” of his current level “for the sake of his health and to make 
relapse less likely.” (GE 1 at 1) 
 
The evaluator found that if Applicant complied with medication for his disorder as 
recommended, and eliminated binge drinking, “both of which he is willing and able to do,” 
then: 
 
[Applicant] could well be found to have sufficient judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness for a security clearance in a future evaluation. However, he 
has not yet made these very necessary changes, and thus cannot be found 
to be of good judgment, reliability and trustworthiness at this time.3 
 
The evaluator noted that Applicant was “willing to do whatever it takes” to maintain 
a clearance, to provide for his wife and young child, and to comply with appropriate 
psychiatric treatment. At the time, however, Applicant was not undergoing treatment for 
his condition. (SOR ¶ 1.b) (GE 3 at 2-4)   
 
 The evaluator concluded that Applicant’s prognosis was “Good, with treatment; 
[and] Poor, without treatment.” (GE 3 at 5) As she noted, “the key question is whether 
[Applicant] is likely to be able to maintain a pattern of good judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness, and under what conditions.” (GE 3 at 2) She found that Applicant’s 
reports of commitment to change and being a stable provider were credible. However, 
the evaluator also found that:  
 
. . . unless [Applicant] receives appropriate treatment and follows through 
with it, he may not be able to keep his commitment if another hypomanic 
episode occurs. He has not followed through with such treatment in the 
past, and sustained adherence to treatment will be necessary to control his 
behavior. Therefore, [Applicant] entering treatment and consistently 
adhering to treatment is necessary for him to have the reliability and 
trustworthiness to safeguard classified materials.4 
 
In reviewing the examiner’s report and noting that Applicant was willing to pursue 
treatment but had yet to actually do so, DOD psychological consultants concurred with 
her overall conclusions. (GE 3, GE 4) 
 
Applicant’s evaluation occurred on September 19, 2017. He met with his evaluator 
for about eight hours. (Tr. 55) He testified that the evaluator told him that “whether or not 
I get the clearance . . . , if you start treatment you will feel better.” (Tr. 52) Applicant 
testified that this advice resonated with him, and he took it to heart. Two days later, on 
                                                          
3 GE 3 at 1. 
 
4 GE 3 at 4.  
 
 
5 
 
 
September 21, 2017, he began seeing a clinical psychiatrist who was with an office 
recommended by the evaluator. (Tr. 36, 52-54, 59)  
 
Applicant saw the psychiatrist every two weeks through October 2017, then once 
in November, 2017, twice in December 2017, and monthly since then, through April 2018, 
the month of the hearing. (AE A) Sessions are ongoing. (Tr. 37-38) Applicant’s provider 
diagnosed him with: 1) bipolar I disorder, most recent episode depressed, severe, without 
psychotic features; and 2) generalized anxiety disorder. She prescribed certain 
medications. (AE A; Tr. 59)  
 
Applicant testified that on occasion, his doctor will adjust his medication. He said 
he meets with his doctor for about 30 minutes, but only for medication management. He 
takes his medication as directed. He testified that, since he has been in treatment, his 
mood has improved, and he feels good, though he has occasional anxiety. Applicant 
acknowledged at hearing that he needs the medication. (Tr. 37, 59-61) 
 
Applicant submitted a March 29, 2018 letter from a licensed clinical social worker 
(LCSW) noting that he had been attending therapy sessions “on a consistent basis” since 
August 28, 2017. Sessions are for one hour, about once a month, and are ongoing. (Tr. 
37-38, 61-62) The LCSW noted that Applicant:  
 
. . . has presented [as] psychiatrically stable and he complies with treatment 
recommendations. He works full time at [his employer] and is married with 
a family. [Applicant] does not appear to be a threat to himself or anyone 
else.5 
 
 Applicant also testified that he is “motivated to do whatever I need to do to get the 
clearance,” including submitting regular reports from his treatment providers to verify that 
he is in treatment and is compliant with it. (Tr. 42) He acknowledged at hearing that the 
DOD evaluator’s assessment of his drinking pattern in September 2017 was correct. At 
that time, he would have about twelve drinks a week and a few times a year, he would 
have six or more drinks at a sitting. Since then, Applicant has curtailed his drinking, to 
one or two drinks at a sitting when he goes out for dinner. Some of his medication should 
not be mixed with alcohol, so drinking sometimes makes him sick. He denied engaging 
in binge drinking currently. (Tr. 40-42) Applicant said he last used marijuana in about 
2002, though he tried spice more recently (at some point between 2004 and 2012), as 
noted in the DOD evaluation. (Tr. 34) 
 
 The psychiatrist’s letter did not address whether or not Applicant had a favorable 
prognosis. Because the letter (AE A) was silent as to that question, I left the record open 
to give Applicant the opportunity to submit an updated letter from his psychiatrist 
addressing it, if appropriate. (Tr. 61-66)  
 
                                                          
5 AE B. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s psychiatrist provided an updated letter, dated May 1, 2018. (AE G) 
Treatment is ongoing, as are changes to Applicant’s medications. She stated:  
 
[Applicant] and I have been working very hard to stabilize his Bipolar 
disorder, and anxiety symptoms. While his symptoms are not stable, my 
hope is that with continued close monitoring and consistent appointments, 
we will be able to control and manage his symptoms in the near future.  
 
*  *  * 
 
I am unable to write a statement of favorable prognosis on [Applicant’s] 
behalf at this time because that is unknown. However, I would like to assure 
you that [Applicant] and I will continue to work very hard to make that 
happen. I hope this information is helpful in your clearing [Applicant] for his 
current job.6 
 
The manager of the apprentice school at Applicant’s employer noted that Applicant 
has maintained above-average shop grades and academic grades. His above-average 
performance places Applicant in position to participate in advanced programing and 
leadership training. (AE C) An associate professor at the community college where 
Applicant studies praised his work experience, trustworthiness, and overall suitability for 
a clearance. Applicant graduated with honors from the associate degree program. (AE D) 
 
Applicant’s wife vouched for her husband’s good moral character, generosity, 
kindness, integrity, and work ethic. He is an excellent husband and a good father to their 
daughter. (AE F) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
                                                          
6 AE G. 
 
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
7 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set forth in AG ¶ 27:    
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not required 
for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified mental health 
professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, should be consulted 
when evaluating potentially disqualifying and mitigating information under 
this guideline and an opinion, including prognosis, should be sought. No 
negative inference concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised 
solely on the basis of mental health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 28. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition that may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(d) failure to follow a prescribed treatment plan related to a diagnosed 
psychological/psychiatric condition that may impair judgment, stability, 
 
8 
 
 
reliability, or trustworthiness, including, but not limited to, failure to take 
prescribed medication or failure to attend required counseling sessions.  
 
Applicant was diagnosed with bipolar II disorder in 2012 by a board-certified family 
nurse practitioner. For a brief period, he was on medication and under treatment. 
However, he unilaterally stopped taking the medication and going to treatment when he 
began to feel better. AG ¶ 28(d) applies.  
 
In September 2017, Applicant was evaluated by a Ph.D. clinical psychologist and 
diagnosed with bipolar I disorder, most recent episode depressed, severe, without 
psychotic features; and generalized anxiety disorder. Applicant’s bipolar disorder is a 
condition that may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or trustworthiness. AG ¶ 28(b) 
applies.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate psychological conditions security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 29. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program 
for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently 
receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by, the U.S. Government that an 
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past psychological/psychiatric condition was temporary, the situation 
has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of 
emotional instability; and  
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
Both AG ¶¶ 28(a) and 28(b) have some application. The initial evaluator and the 
medical professionals Applicant is currently seeing have each concluded that Applicant’s 
bipolar disorder is readily controllable with treatment. Applicant has specifically been 
found to have a good prognosis with treatment, and a poor prognosis without treatment. 
AG ¶ 28(a) therefore partially applies. Similarly, Applicant appears to have “gotten the 
message” about the fact that he needs treatment, and he began pursuing treatment with 
an LCSW and a psychiatrist immediately after his September 2017 evaluation. That 
treatment is ongoing. AG ¶ 28(b) therefore also partially applies.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant remains in active treatment. His participation is regular and ongoing. 
However, at the time of the hearing, he had been in regular treatment for only seven 
months. As Applicant’s treating psychiatrist found, his current condition is not stable, and 
she is unable to provide a favorable prognosis, as his prognosis is unknown. As she also 
found, “my hope is that with continued close monitoring and consistent appointments, we 
will be able to control and manage his symptoms in the near future.” Particularly given the 
fact that Applicant was initially diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2012 and did not follow 
through with treatment and medication as directed, Applicant needs to develop a steady 
track record of compliance with treatment recommendations. Additionally, Applicant only 
pursued treatment after it became clear that his clearance was in jeopardy. Thus, less 
weight is afforded these recent actions. AG ¶¶ 28(a) and 28(b) do not fully apply.  
 
For similar reasons, AG ¶ 28(c) also does not apply. Applicant’s condition is 
ongoing and is not temporary. AG ¶¶ 29(d) and 29(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline I in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a valued employee, and is technically proficient at his job. Applicant 
testified about his need for a clearance and for his desire to work to manage his disorder. 
Having recently married and begun to raise a family, his life has stabilized. His testimony 
and presentation at hearing was credibly in line with the conclusions of the DOD 
evaluator, who observed that he has a desire to address his disorder by pursuing 
appropriate treatment and to do so consistently.  
 
 
10 
 
 
However, given his psychiatrist’s conclusions that Applicant’s bipolar condition 
remains unstable and his prognosis is unknown, it is difficult for me to override that 
conclusion and find that the Guideline I security concerns are fully resolved at this time. 
At some point in the future, once Applicant develops a stronger track record of regular 
participation in treatment and compliance with his medication regimen, he may well be an 
appropriate candidate for access to classified information. But at this time, the security 
concerns arising from his condition are not sufficiently mitigated to warrant granting him 
a clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the Guideline I security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                  
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
