 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03183 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 13, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On September 1, 2017, Department Counsel withdrew 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. 
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 14, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
March 8, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 22, 2018. The hearing was continued 
at Applicant’s request to March 23, 2018. The case was reassigned to me on March 22, 
2018. The hearing was convened as rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through O, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 3, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since June 2014. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which 
she has held since 2009. She attended college at four different institutions between 
2000 and 2012. She accumulated many credit hours, but did not earn her bachelor’s 
degree until 2012. She also has a master’s degree, which she earned in 2017. She has 
never married, and she has no children.1 
 
Applicant submitted a job application to a company in 2011. She provided an 
affirmative response to a question on the application that asked if she had a bachelor’s 
degree or equivalent. She had more than 120 credit hours at the time, but she did not 
have a bachelor’s degree. She stated that she thought that satisfied the “equivalent” 
part of the test. She did not intend to mislead the company into believing she had a 
bachelor’s degree, but she also submitted a resume that could be interpreted (and 
apparently was by the employer) as indicating she had a bachelor’s degree. She was 
terminated from employment after orientation.2 
 
Applicant worked for a company between 2012 and February 2014. One of the 
partners in the company was a married reserve military officer. Applicant claims that he 
raped her at her home in December 2013. She stated that she wanted to make it clear 
that she did not want a sexual relationship with him, so she texted him the next day to 
tell him they needed to talk. He called her and said he was coming over to her home. 
When he arrived, she told him that she did not want a relationship with him. He stated 
that was fine, but only after one more time. They then had sex, which she felt she was 
pressured into, but was not rape as it was “consensual because [she] made a conscious 
decision to do it.” He told her during the second incident that he did not love his wife, but 
he loved a married woman with whom he had been having an affair for 15 years.3 
 
Applicant felt like she was being harassed and threatened at work by the partner. 
She initially downplayed the alleged assault to her employer, but she eventually told the 
company that she had been raped by the partner. The company instituted an 
investigation. The company asked Applicant if she had reported the alleged rape to the 
police. She had not. She testified that she thought the company reported it to the police. 
She believed that even though nobody at the company told her they reported it to the 
police and no police officer ever contacted her.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13, 19-20; GE 1-3; AE F, G, O.  
 
2 Tr. at 20-23, 28-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE F.  
 
3 Tr. at 35, 68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2.  
 
4 Tr. at 35-43, 71-73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant did not believe she was being treated fairly by the company and its 
human resources (HR) department. She remembered that in December 2013, after the 
rape, the partner let her use his office. She saw the HR director’s name on papers on 
the partner’s desk. When she opened the document, she saw what she thought were 
the HR director’s divorce papers. The papers were actually a marital separation 
agreement. She surmised that the HR director must be the married woman with whom 
the partner was having the affair. She thought this information would corroborate her 
story, and she told HR about the papers in January 2014. In February 2014, she went 
into the partner’s office and made a copy of the marital separation agreement. She sent 
a message to a different partner stating that she had the papers and wanted to give 
them to him. He did not respond to the message. She subsequently gave the papers to 
HR personnel. In February 2014, she was told that if she did not resign that she would 
be terminated for removing personal information from a partner’s office. She tendered 
her resignation.5 
 
Applicant reported the alleged rape to civilian authorities in May 2014. The police 
report indicated that in July 2014, the detective “explained to [Applicant] that there were 
not the requite elements of Rape, according to [state] law, in her account. [He] 
answered her questions and ensured she had [his] contact number as well as 
knowledge of Victim Services.” She also reported the alleged rape to military authorities. 
The military apparently did not pursue criminal charges.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
August 25, 2014. She reported the circumstances surrounding the events that led to her 
losing her jobs in 2011 and 2014. She noted that the rape “case is still under 
investigation by the police, the CID, and DSS-IS.” She testified that she thought the 
police were still involved in the case.7 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for taking the documents from the partner’s office. 
She realizes that it displayed poor judgment and was not the best way to handle a 
difficult situation. She also testified that “really, when HR was having a conversation 
with me about can I bring them things to corroborate what I’m saying, I really thought I 
was just cooperating with the investigation and trying to get them what they could use to 
[corroborate her allegations].” She asserts such conduct will never be repeated. She 
has received counseling to deal with the stress from the alleged assault and other 
matters.8 
 
 Applicant actively volunteers in her community. She submitted documents and 
letters attesting to her excellent job performance. She is praised for her responsibility, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23-27, 53-60, 63-70, 73-74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4.  
 
6 Tr. at 40, 45-53, 60-63; GE 1, 2; AE L.  
 
7 Tr. at 60-63; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE N.  
 
4 
 
dependability, honesty, work ethic, compassion, dedication, leadership, discretion, 
trustworthiness, reliability, intelligence, professionalism, and integrity.9  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
9 AE A, E, K.  
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
 
6 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant was terminated from her employment “after 
submitting an application indicating [she was] in possession of a bachelor’s degree 
when [she] had not graduated.” She admitted that she provided an affirmative response 
to a question on the application that asked if she had a bachelor’s degree or equivalent. 
She had more than 120 credit hours at the time, but she did not have a bachelor’s 
degree. She stated that she thought that satisfied the “equivalent” part of the test. That 
is not the standard interpretation of the question, but it is accepted as honest. Having 
considered all the evidence, including Applicant’s testimony and demeanor, I conclude 
that she did not intentionally provide false information on the job application. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Applicant went into a partner’s office and photocopied personal documents of 
another employee. Her actions led to her resignation in lieu of termination. The conduct 
reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 
16(d) and 16(e) are applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Applicant expressed remorse for taking the documents from the partner’s office. 
She realizes that it displayed poor judgment and was not the best way to handle a 
difficult situation. She asserts such conduct will never be repeated. She has received 
counseling to deal with the stress from the alleged assault and other matters. The 
circumstances surrounding her actions were unique and unlikely to recur. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, I find the conduct continues to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are troubling 
aspects of Applicant’s thought processes. There is some mitigation in this case, but I 
 
7 
 
continue to have concerns about Applicant’s conduct. Additional analysis is included 
under the whole person. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
  
 Applicant identifies as a rape victim. As such, she deserves to be treated with 
dignity and respect, and it is hoped that she continues with counseling to get over that 
trauma. However, I have lingering concerns about her judgment and her overall thought 
processes. I do not believe she intended to lie to her employer in 2011 that she had a 
bachelor’s degree, but most people would interpret her answer and her resume as 
indicating she had a bachelor’s degree, which clearly the employer did or they would not 
have terminated her when they discovered she did not. Even more concerning is her 
2014 actions. The problem is not only that she went into an employee’s office and took 
and photocopied personal information from another employee, it is also that she thought 
that was a good idea. She testified that “really, when HR was having a conversation 
with me about can I bring them things to corroborate what I’m saying, I really thought I 
was just cooperating with the investigation and trying to get them what they could use to 
[corroborate her allegations].” 
 
Applicant certainly appears to be the honest person who is portrayed in her 
character letters. However, I am bound by AG ¶ 2(b), which requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” I simply do not believe Applicant should be trusted with 
classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
