 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            1 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-03263 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 6, 
2013. On February 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 14, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on May 22, 2017, and 
the case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. On January 25, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for February 15, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            2 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted into evidence, without 
objection. I appended to the record the Government’s exhibit list as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and correspondence the Government sent to Applicant as HE II. At the hearing, 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which I admitted 
into evidence, without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until 
March 30, 2018. Applicant timely provided additional documents that were admitted into 
evidence as AE D through K and M, without objection. I admitted AE L over the 
Government’s objection. I appended several post-hearing email exchanges between the 
parties as HE III through V. I appended a post-hearing email from the Government 
concerning jurisdiction as HE VI. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 26, 
2018. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same under either version. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
The Government objected to the admissibility of AE L, which is a Memorandum 
for the Record (MFR) noting Applicant’s appeal of an employment termination 
(discussed more fully below). The basis of the Government’s objection was a lack of 
reliability because certain facts therein were contradicted by Applicant’s hearing 
testimony, and because it was not clear whom or whether the document was ever sent, 
or for which appeal (there were two). On the subject line of the MFR, it references the 
appeal for which it was issued. Applicant credibly testified at the hearing that he sent 
this appeal letter. The facts in the MFR are not a materially discrepant in light of the 
record as a whole. Thus, I overruled the Government’s objection, and have accorded 
the facts therein the appropriate weight given the record as a whole.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 51, has a 13-year-old daughter. He divorced his wife of nine years 
in 2011. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1996 and a master’s degree in 2000. He has 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD 4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD 4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD 4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The new AG, which are found at 
Appendix A to SEAD 4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to classified national 
security information. (SEAD 4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer and his SCA (GE 1). 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            3 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
been working towards another master’s degree since 2016. Applicant has been 
employed full time by a U.S. government agency since January 2018, and had been 
part time as of September 2017. At times, he has worked part time as a private 
investigator and a substitute school teacher. The Government confirmed that DOHA 
retains jurisdiction in this matter because Applicant is sponsored by a defense 
contractor with whom he is subject to hire pending a determination about his security 
clearance.4 
 
Applicant honorably served four years on active duty with the Army (1985 – 
1989), seven years with the Army National Guard (1992 – 1999), and six years on 
active duty with the Air Force (2001 – 2007). He has served in the Air Force Reserve 
since 2007. He has held a security clearance on and off since 1985.5  
 
Applicant was employed by another U.S. government agency from October 2007 
through April 2012, when he was terminated for reasons more fully discussed below. He 
was employed by a defense contractor from June 2012 through April 2013, when he 
was laid off. Applicant was unemployed following his layoff between April 2014 and 
February 2016; and following his termination between April 2012 and June 2012. 6  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$119,285 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m, and 1.p through 1.s), and that Applicant filed two 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions, one in 2012 and another in 2013, both of which were 
dismissed (SOR ¶¶ 1.n. and 1.o). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant 
submitted fraudulent time and attendance records while employed by a U.S. 
government agency (dates not specified) (SOR ¶ 2.a), that he was terminated by that 
agency for such actions in 2012 (SOR ¶ 2.b), and that he deliberately falsified the 
reasons for the termination on his SCA in 2013 (SOR ¶ 2.c). In his SOR Answer, 
Applicant admitted all but the following two Guideline F allegations: SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 
1.p. He denied the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 2.a, and admitted those contained in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. 
 
Guideline F  
 
Applicant denied the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m ($246) on the basis that 
it should have been covered by insurance, although he is not sure to what creditor or 
specific medical expense the debt relates. He has not taken steps to research the issue 
or otherwise dispute the debt with his creditor or credit reporting agencies.7 
 
                                                          
4 AE D and E; HE VI; Tr. at 6-8; 37-49; 119-120. 
 
5 AE D and E; Tr. at 6-8; 37-49; 119-120. 
 
6 AE D and E; Tr. at 6-8; 37-49; 119-120. 
 
7 Tr. at 70-71. 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            4 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p ($2,265) is the amount that his former defense-
contractor employer claims Applicant was overpaid for military-leave pay related to 
annual training. Applicant disputed this amount with his employer by providing copies of 
two pay stubs that show the total amount of $2,265 being deducted from his pay check. 
His employer claimed that the deduction was for other expenses that Applicant owed.8 
 
Applicant primarily attributed his financial indebtedness to periods of 
unemployment and underemployment, and the costs associated with a contentious 
divorce and custody battle. As of the date of the hearing, he had not resolved any of the 
admitted SOR debts. He planned to file another bankruptcy petition in March 2018 to 
resolve all of them except for the child support debt which is not allowed (SOR ¶ 
1.h/$2,323).9  
 
As part of his divorce decree, Applicant was ordered to pay child support:  initially 
$1,198 per month, effective 2010, then $1,339, effective 2014. He was also ordered to 
pay $883 per month spousal support for four years, effective 2010. With the exception 
of one car loan, Applicant was assigned to pay all of the marital debts.10   
 
Applicant fell behind with his alimony and child support payments due to 
unemployment. At some point, he was approximately $15,000 in arrears for both child 
support and alimony. In July 2016, he paid that arrearage in full from a tax refund he 
received for the period when he was receiving combat pay working for a defense 
contractor. In 2017, the court modified his child support obligation to $600 per month. 
He again fell behind due to underemployment, and now owes an arrearage of 
approximately $4,100, which is an increased amount from that alleged (SOR ¶ 
1.h/$2,134).11 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions in March 2012 and August 2013, 
both of which were dismissed due to Applicant’s failure to make plan payments (in 
2013, at the advice of his attorney to sort out a child support issue; in 2014, because of 
his 2014 termination). During his first and second bankruptcies, he paid a total of 
$13,602 towards his debts. In 2017, Applicant filed a third Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition, and agreed to a repayment plan of $650 per month for 40 months, then $1,102 
per month for 20 months. In January 2018, the bankruptcy was dismissed after he fell 
behind with his payments due to underemployment. Applicant planned to file a new 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2018 and is hopeful that it will be successfully 
discharged since he now has a steady income from a full-time job from which he can 
afford the payments. Applicant does not want to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy because his 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 66-70. 
 
9 AE G; Tr. at 29-37. 
 
10 AE B at 4. 
 
11 Tr. at 71-75; 127-132. 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            5 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
assets include a home that he inherited from his parents, which he does not want to 
lose or sell because it would displace his 93-year-old grandmother who lives there.12 
 
Applicant applied for a hardship program with his mortgage lender in March 2018 
(SOR ¶1.a/$57,153), who had previously modified his loan in 2014. Without providing 
any corroborating documents, Applicant claimed that he was only now $30,000 in 
arrears on the loan.13  
 
 Applicant has earned an annual salary of $42,000 since beginning full-time work 
in January 2018. His part-time salary with this employer was approximately $1,500 per 
month. As a substitute teacher, he earned approximately $80 to $120 per day, which he 
does not expect to resume now that he has a full-time job. When he was terminated in 
2012, Applicant had been earning approximately $117,000 per year, including his 
reserve pay. When he resumed working in 2013, he earned a salary of $90,000. His 
civilian combat-zone salary was eight months of a $150,000 annual salary, the first time, 
and approximately $154,000, the second time. Applicant averred that his combat-zone 
salary was barely sufficient to meet his ongoing expenses, including debts owed to his 
ex-wife, such that he could not apply any of it towards his SOR debts.14  
 
Guideline E  
 
Applicant’s former U.S. government agency employer alleged that, between 
January and November 2011, Applicant may have committed time and attendance 
fraud, when he exhibited a pattern of irregular arrivals, departures, and unexplained 
absences during the workday. An independent investigation concluded that Applicant 
did, in fact, submit fraudulent timesheets totaling over 400 hours that he did not work for 
a total loss to the Government of approximately $21,000.15 Applicant’s employer 
completed a Standard Form 50, Notification of Personnel Action documenting 
Applicant’s termination and listing the reason as “Time and Attendance Fraud.”16  
 
Appellant appealed the termination with his employer in March 2012. He was 
able to account for some of the hours alleged to have been missed (for example, he 
was in training during one two-week period). However, that appeal was denied. He then 
appealed it with the Merit Systems Protection Board in May 2012. However, Applicant 
eventually withdrew the appeal because he was unable to pursue it due to obtaining a 
new job with a defense contractor overseas in a combat zone.17 
                                                          
12 AE G; GE 6 and 7; Tr. at 32-33, 79-86, 92-122. 
 
13 AE K; Tr. at 75, 77-79, 123-125. 
 
14 AE M; Tr. at 75; 120-121; 136-138. 
 
15 GE 4. 
 
16 GE 5. 
 
17 HE V; AE L & I; Tr. at 30-32; 58-60; 113-114; 146-148. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            6 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
During the independent investigation, Applicant waived his rights and admitted 
that he knowingly submitted fraudulent time and attendance documents (more 
specifically, inaccurate timesheets reflecting hours not worked) and agreed to reimburse 
the Government for the total amount owed. He explained that he would leave work early 
to deal with personal matters related to an ongoing divorce and custody battle. He 
further explained that he had not accrued hours to cover his absences and had so many 
issues in his life that he did not care about properly accounting for his time.18 At the 
hearing, Applicant denied these admissions and adamantly denied any fraud or intent to 
be paid for hours not worked. However, he acknowledged that he was negligent with his 
submissions because of the circumstances of his divorce. He explained that he had an 
informal arrangement with his former supervisor that he could make up time by working 
extra hours. During the independent investigation, Applicant’s former supervisor 
corroborated the informal arrangement.19 
 
Applicant believed that he had been working sufficient extra hours to make up for 
any discrepancies with his timesheets. The issue with his timesheets arose when a new 
supervisor took over, who had neither been aware of nor agreed to any such informal 
arrangement. The new supervisor never counseled Applicant about the timesheet issue 
prior to initiating the independent investigation.20  
 
Whole Person 
 
 Applicant earned numerous awards during his military service.21 He was 
deployed to combat zones three times. As a civilian contractor, he worked in combat 
zones for a year between 2015 and 2016, and for 10 months between 2012 and 2013.22  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”24 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
18 GE 4. 
 
19 GE4; Tr. at 50-65; 94-109. 
 
20 GE4; Tr. at 50-65; 94-109. 
 
21 AE D and H. 
 
22 AE E and L; Tr. at 33, 39, 109. 
 
23 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24 Egan at 527. 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            7 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.27 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”28 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.29 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
                                                          
25 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
26 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
27 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
29 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            8 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.30 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.31 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”32 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”33 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.34  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR under this guideline may be mitigated 
by any of the following potentially applicable factors: 
 
 
                                                          
30 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
31 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
32 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
33 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
34 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            9 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that 
remain unresolved.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment 
were circumstances largely beyond his control. However, Applicant did not meet his 
burden to prove that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Bankruptcy is a reasonable option to address 
delinquent debts. However, Applicant has not yet been able to follow through with his 
payment plans. I credit him with repaying creditors at least $13,602 through his previous 
bankruptcies and with his efforts to resolve his child support and mortgage debts. 
However, these efforts do not suffice to establish this mitigating condition. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is partially established. While Applicant articulated a reasonable basis 
to dispute the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, he did not provide any documentary proof to 
substantiate his dispute or sufficient evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant 
did meet his burden to establish this mitigating condition as to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.p. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            10 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The submission of fraudulent time and attendance records (SOR ¶ 2.a) renders 
the following disqualifying condition under this guideline potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d)(2): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (2) any 
disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rules violations . . . . 
 
However, Applicant’s termination was a consequence of the alleged fraud and 
does not have independent security significance. Accordingly, I find in favor of Applicant 
as to SOR ¶ 2.b.  
 
If deemed a deliberate omission, concealment or falsification, Appellant’s failure 
to disclose on his SCA that he was terminated in 2012 because of his alleged 
submission of fraudulent time and attendance records (SOR ¶ 2.c) renders the following 
disqualifying condition under this guideline potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            11 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an Appellant’s state 
of mind at the time of the omission. An Appellant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate.  
 
The security concerns raised in the SOR under this guideline may be mitigated 
by the following potentially applicable factor: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant denied ever admitting to the independent investigator that he 
fraudulently submitted time and attendance records. Having had an opportunity during 
the hearing to observe Appellant's demeanor and to assess his credibility, I found him to 
be sincere and credible. Throughout the record and at the hearing, Applicant was 
consistent in acknowledging that he was negligent with his submissions because of the 
circumstances of his divorce, but denied any fraud. He appealed his termination twice. 
His supervisor corroborated the informal arrangement to which he agreed with respect 
to Applicant’s leave. In light of these facts and the record as a whole, I find that while 
certainly negligent, his submissions were not fraudulent. Even if the submissions were 
deemed fraudulent, which would certainly not be a minor offense, it happened so long 
ago and under such unique circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 16(d)(2) is not established as to SOR ¶ 2.a, but if it were deemed so, then AG ¶ 
17(c) would apply to mitigate the concern. 
 
Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he had been terminated in 2014 for “missing 
too much work,” but did not use the word “fraud.” Applicant acknowledged that he knew, 
at the time that he completed his SCA, that he had been terminated for submitting 
“fraudulent” time and attendance records. However, Applicant did not use the word 
“fraud” in his SCA response because he believed that he did not commit fraud. He 
further believed that his disclosure would suffice to disclose the fact and circumstance 
of his termination. Given that Applicant disclosed the termination and provided a reason 
consistent with the facts and circumstances surrounding the termination as he believed 
was responsive to the question, I do not find that Applicant had any intent to omit or 
deceive.35 Even if it were deemed that he did have such intent, I find that the omission 
of the word “fraud” was not security significant given that his response did, in fact, put 
the Government on notice about his termination. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established as to SOR ¶ 2.c, but if it were deemed so, then AG ¶ 17(c) would apply to 
mitigate the concern. 
                                                          
35 See ISCR Case No. 01-19278 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2003). 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            12 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the whole-person factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
security concerns raised by his personal conduct, but not those raised by his financial 
indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
  
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            13 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
