 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01446 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and B (foreign influence). On August 29, 2016, and November 4, 2016, 
Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On November 29, 2016, the Government submitted its written case. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. On January 10, 2017, Applicant received the FORM, and 
was instructed to file any objections to this information, or to supply additional 
information within 30 days of receipt. Applicant did not submit any information within the 
 
2 
 
30-day period. On October 1, 2017, DOHA assigned the case to me. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence without objection. 
  
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Iraq. Applicant did not object, and the request is granted. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of 
particular note is that the risk of terrorist activities in Iraq remains extremely high. No 
section of Iraq is safe or immune from violence, and the potential exists throughout the 
country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, against U.S. and other Western 
nationals at any time. The country’s human rights record remains poor.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since 
January 2015. He was born in Kurdistan, Iraq to Iraqi parents. He spent his formative 
years in Kurdistan, where he was educated, and ultimately received a bachelor’s degree 
in 2017. Applicant has never married and has no dependents. (Items 3, 4)  
 
 Applicant has a long history of service with the U.S. Armed Forces. The U.S 
State Department granted him a Special Immigrant Visa (SIV)1 in 2008 for his “12+ 
months of exceptional service alongside U.S. Forces.” (Item 4) With his SIV and 
Government sponsorship, Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2008. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2014. (Items 3, 4) He immediately applied for and received his 
U.S. passport that same year. (Item 3)  
 
  The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted a number of Iraqi connections. 
Specifically, Applicant’s father and brother are resident citizens of Iraq, he has a brother 
who is a citizen of Iraq and resident of the United States, and he has a brother who is a 
citizen of Iraq and resident of Germany. Additionally, Applicant’s stepmother, 
stepbrothers, and stepsisters are resident citizens of Iraq, and he has a stepbrother who 
is a citizen of Iraq and resident in Germany. Lastly, Applicant has friends who are 
resident citizens of Iraq. (Items 1, 2) 
 
 Applicant’s father is retired and his mother is deceased. There is no evidence 
that any of his family members, extended family, or friends work for or are associated 
with the Iraqi government. Applicant has monthly contact with his father and contact to a 
lesser extent with his siblings. (Item 4) Before Applicant’s current employer hired him as 
a linguist, he held a number of positions in support of U.S. troops in the war on 
terrorism. From 2004 to 2013, he served in various capacities in the United States, Iraq, 
and Afghanistan as a cultural advisor, a linguist, and a role player with U.S. troops. 
(Item 4) At the time he submitted his November 2016 SOR answer, he had been 
deployed to Iraq as a linguist since March 2015. (Item 2) 
                                                          
1 The Special Immigrant Visa program is available to persons who worked with the U.S. Armed Forces or 
under Chief of Mission authority as a translator or interpreter in Iraq or Afghanistan. This program, which 
offers visas to up to fifty persons a year, remains active. See https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us-
visas/immigrate/siv-iraqi-afghan-translators-interpreters.html for further information. 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted that he held an Iraqi passport issued in 
2014 with a 2022 expiration date. (Item 1) He surrendered his Iraqi passport to his 
security manager in March 2015. (Item 1)2 
  
 Applicant stated that he would immediately report any contact by a foreign 
government, intelligence or security service, or terrorist organization, or any attempt to 
blackmail or coerce him. (Item 4) He professed his undivided loyalty to the United 
States in his security clearance application: 
 
DUE TO CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS I WILL BE WORKING AND 
RESIDING IN Iraq with US ARMY as a Linguist. I am here fully willing and 
from deep in my heart faithfully and loyally support my US Forces and put 
my life on the line with their(s) not to betray, act lazy and draw my duties, I 
promise to devote all my skills and abilities for a better success and 
achieving outstanding results. I and my family have always been 
supportive to the US Military and the US Government and any 
organization or association that serves the US Government. This is a 
promise I am committed to go on with and never give up. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant stated during a February 2015 Counterintelligence-Focusing Screening 
Questionnaire that he wished he were born in the United States because everything 
about him is westernized. (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
2 When Applicant’s SOR was issued in July 2016, the former DOD Directive 5220.6 was in effect which 
specifically listed possession of a foreign passport as a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Since 
then, the Directive has been amended and new Guidelines were implemented effective June 8, 2017. The 
new Guidelines removed this provision thus negating this allegation as a security concern. In any event, 
Applicant surrendered his passport to his security manager. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s immediate family, stepmother, stepsiblings, and friends are citizens of 
Iraq and except for two brothers and a stepbrother are residents of Iraq. One brother 
and a stepbrother are residents of Germany and one brother is a resident of the United 
States. None of his family members or friends work for or are associated with the Iraqi 
government. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens 
remains high in Iraq, and Iraq continues to have human rights problems. Applicant’s 
foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
 
6 
 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.3  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense for many years. He stated that he would 
immediately report any contact by a foreign government, intelligence or security service, 
or terrorist organization, or any attempt to blackmail or coerce him. The Appeal Board 
has stated that such a statement, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is 
record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in 
comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.4 
In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
4 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
It not surprising that Applicant, having been born, raised, and educated in Iraq, 
would have relatives and friends from Iraq with whom he maintains a relationship. With 
that said, he has demonstrated his loyalty to the United States since at least 2004 at 
times putting his life at risk. I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Iraq earned him a Special Immigrant 
Visa. He returned to Iraq and Afghanistan several times since his immigration to work 
with the U.S. military. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”5 The complicated state of affairs in Iraq 
places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign 
family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Foreign preference concerns are  no 
longer relevant. 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
