 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01991 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 9, 2016, and on August 30, 2017, 
she elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Applicant received the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on October 23, 
2017. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 2 through 6. Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM, and she did not object to the Government’s evidence. It is admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. She admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 
2.a through 2.l. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She married in 1995 and divorced in 2001. She 
remarried in 2006. She and her husband separated in 2015. She does not know his 
whereabouts. She has four children, ages 21, 16, 12, and 5 years old. She has been 
employed by a federal contractor since 2004. She has held a security clearance since 
2007.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 past due and delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$26,559, one of which is a judgment. The debts are corroborated by Applicant’s 
admissions and credit reports from November 2016, May 2016, and November 2015. 
Applicant stated in her November 2015 security clearance application (SCA) that she 
was on workers compensation for 15 months and was unable to pay all of her bills. In 
her answer to the SOR, she said that in March 2012 she fell at work and her life 
changed. Her employer was afraid to keep her employed because she had seizures 
after her fall. She is attempting to take care of her financial issues without filing 
bankruptcy. She said she is a single mother with four children. Applicant did not provide 
additional amplifying information about her actions to resolve her debts, her current 
finances, budget, child support, or if she has received financial counseling.3  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. In 
Applicant’s response to the SOR she stated that her mother is a citizen of the United 
States and is willing to give up her Nigerian passport.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.  
 
4 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts from at least 2015 that she is 
unwilling or unable to pay. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. She did not 
provide evidence of any actions to resolve the debts. She did not provide amplifying 
information about her finances or her ability to pay her debts. She did not provide 
information about whether she is working full time. She is a single mother with four 
children. She was injured on the job in 2012 and received workers compensation. It is 
unknown what her current financial situation is, and whether she can pay her delinquent 
debts. The evidence supports a conclusion that her financial problems were beyond her 
control, but without additional information, I am unable to conclude she acted 
reasonably. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial problems are recent and 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. There is no evidence that she has received 
financial counseling and there are not clear indications her problems are being resolved 
or are under control. There is no evidence that she has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security 
concern if they create circumstances in which the individual may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of 
foreign contacts and interests should consider the country in which the 
foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is it associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen of the United States. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude her citizenship raises a heightened risk or security concern. None of the 
disqualifying conditions apply. I find in Applicant’s favor under this guideline.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old mother, who is struggling financially due to an injury 
she incurred in 2012, being off work, and receiving workers compensation for a period. 
She failed to provide sufficient evidence to determine that her financial problems and 
delinquent debts are being addressed. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B were refuted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
