 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03631 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 10, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 7, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on April 17, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on April 18, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on May 9, 2018. The Government offered six 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered seven exhibits at the hearing, referred to as Applicant’s 
Exhibits A through G.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record remained open 
 
2 
 
until close of business on May 21, 2018, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted no additional documents.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 17, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old.  He is unmarried and has no children.  He has a high 
school diploma, and a year and a half of college.  He holds the position of Aircraft 
Mechanic for a defense contractor.  He seeks to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has seventeen delinquent debts totaling in 
excess of $27,000.  In his Answer, Applicant admits all of the allegations, except 1.c., 
1.m., 1.n., 1o, 1.p., and 1.q.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated August 28, 2015; 
October 20, 2016; January 6, 2018; and April 22, 2018, reflect that each of these debts 
were owing at some point.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and 6.)     
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 2006 
through March 2012.  While in the military, Applicant has no financial problems. He paid 
his bills and did not use his credit cards, as they had a zero balance.  From 2012 to 
2014, Applicant was placed on inactive reserve duty for two years, and was honorably 
discharged in 2014.  During this two year period, Applicant was unable to find 
employment.  He moved in with his now ex-girlfriend and her four children, and together 
they used Applicant’s credit cards to pay bills and make ends meet.  His girlfriend 
worked full time, and she made the monthly payments to keep him afloat.  In 2014, he 
and his girlfriend separated.  At that point, Applicant was supported only by 
unemployment benefits of about $1,200 monthly, and was unable to stay current on his 
credit card debt.  He fell delinquent on most of his bills incurred during the relationship.  
Those delinquent debts are listed in the SOR:  
 
 In early 2017, Applicant hired an internet-based law firm to assist him in repairing 
his credit report.  Since then, Applicant has paid the firm $119 each month for their 
service.  Applicant does not know exactly what they are doing for him as none of the 
monthly payment he makes goes toward resolving his debt.  He only knows that they 
have sent out letters of dispute to some of his creditors.  (Tr. p. 45.)  Applicant has 
contacted each of his creditors without the help of the law firm, and has informed them 
of his current financial situation.  He has set up payment plans with some of them, and 
others he plans to pay when sufficient monies become available from resolving debt he 
is currently paying.  He states that he intends to pay all of the creditors listed in the 
SOR.     
 
 
3 
 
1.a.  A delinquent credit card debt was charged off in the amount of approximately 
$4,596.  Applicant states that the account was settled for $2,527.  Since March 2018, he 
has been making regular monthly payments of $210.67 that he plans to continue until 
the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)        
 
1.b.  A delinquent credit card was charged off in the amount of $3,117.  The debt 
remains outstanding.  Applicant intends to pay it once he has resolved other debt.  He 
believes this debt to be the same debt alleged in allegation 1.p. (Tr. pp. 33 and 53)   
 
1.c.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $972.  The debt was paid in full through garnishment, and his 
most recent credit report no longer shows it as owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and 
Government Exhibit 7.)    
 
1.d.  A delinquent credit card debt was charged off in the amount of approximately 
$820.  This debt remains outstanding.  Applicant intends to pay it once he has resolved 
other debt.  (Tr. p. 35.) 
 
1.e.  A debt owed to a University for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $677.  Applicant is currently making regular monthly payments of $52.07 that 
he plans to continue until the debt is paid in full. (Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
1.f.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $626.  Since March 2018, Applicant has been making regular monthly 
payments of $52.15 that he plans to continue until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit B.) 
 
1.g.  A delinquent cable service account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $572.  The debt is still outstanding.  Applicant intends immediately settle the 
account, and start a payment plan to resolve it.  (Tr. p. 40.)   
 
1.h.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$435.  Applicant tried to pay the debt but the creditor states that they are no longer 
accepting payments, as the account has been closed.  The debt has not been paid.  (Tr. 
pp. 40-41.)      
 
1.i.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$349. Applicant states that the creditor is no longer accepting payments, as the account 
has been closed.  The debt has not been paid.     
  
1.j.  A delinquent credit card account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $317.  Applicant is currently making regular monthly payments of $26.41 that 
he plans to continue until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
1.k.  A debt owed to creditor for a small loan was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $315.  The debt is remains outstanding.     
     
 
4 
 
1.l.  A debt owed to a creditor for a payday loan was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $112.  The debt has been paid in full    
 
1.m.  A debt owed to a jewelry store for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $796.  Applicant contends that the creditor has no record of the 
debt.  Applicant’s most recent credit report no longer shows the debt as owing.  (Tr. p. 
49.)   
 
1.n.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $9,195.  Applicant has no knowledge of the account and is trying to find out 
more information about it.  If it is determined to be his debt, he plans to pay it.   
 
1.o.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $976.  This debt is no longer outstanding.  (Tr. p. 50.)   
 
1.p.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $3,342.  The debt remains outstanding.  Applicant believes the debt to be the 
same as the debt alleged in allegation 1.b.   (Tr. p. 53)    
 
1.q.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $137.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt, however it was removed from 
his credit report by the law firm. 
 
 In regard to each of the debts listed in the SOR, Applicant contacted each of the 
creditors concerning resolution of the debt.  He is either on a payment plan to resolve 
the debt, planning on being on a payment plan to resolve the debt when he has 
completed payment of others, or is disputing the debt through the law firm he hired to 
assist him in repairing his credit report. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
6 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Following his military career, Applicant was unable to find employment.  He 
incurred excessive delinquent debt that he could not afford to pay.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
After leaving active duty, Applicant was unemployed for about two years.  This 
situation was beyond his control, and led to his financial difficulties.  During his 
relationship with his girlfriend, who had four children to support, he allowed her to use 
his credit cards, and she paid the bills accordingly.  When the relationship ended, 
Applicant was left with the debt.  He has taken certain responsible action for his debts 
by contacting his creditors and explaining his situation, and hiring a law firm to help him 
repair his credit report.  He has already paid off several of the debts, and is making 
payments to resolve others.  He intends to pay all of the debts listed in the SOR as 
money opens up from other debt that has been paid.  Under the circumstances, 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts, and continues to act 
reasonably and responsibly with the intention of resolving all of his debt.     
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
