 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01393 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his marijuana use 
while holding a security clearance, and denial of his drug abuse history while attempting 
to renew his clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 14, 2015, seeking to renew his eligibility for a security clearance. On 
January 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 8, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a decision based on the administrative (written) record, without a hearing. On 
March 27, 2017, a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) department 
counsel reviewed the case and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 4, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
July 10, 2017, setting the hearing for July 25, 2017. On that date, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C into evidence. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 1, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations concerning his 
drug involvement and his false denials concerning that history in two e-QIPs and two 
security interviews. These admissions and the supporting evidence admitted at the 
hearing establish the following facts. 
  
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is married with two adult children. He graduated 
from high school in June 1979, and has taken some college courses. He has been 
employed by a major defense contractor since October 1979, and seeks renewal of the 
security clearance he has held since 1987 in connection with that employment. He has 
no military service. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 6-8, 28, 31, 55.) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana and cocaine while he was in high school. He stopped 
when he was hired by the defense contractor because he was informed that drug 
abuse, in addition to being illegal, was not permitted under the company’s drug-free 
workplace policy. While he was on vacation with friends during 1989, he used marijuana 
again; and was arrested, charged, and fined for possession of the marijuana (under 
three ounces) that he was carrying during a traffic stop. Applicant falsified his October 1, 
2004 e-QIP, submitted for periodic review of his security clearance, by answering, “No,” 
to the question in Section 24 asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of 
any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs. He also falsified his April 14, 2015 e-QIP by 
answering, “No,” to the Section 22 question that asked whether he had ever been 
charged with a drug-related offense. He acknowledged that he should have answered, 
 
 
 
 
3 
“Yes,” and disclosed this information on both his 2004 and his 2015 e-QIPs, but 
attributed those failures to carelessness rather than intentional concealment. He 
provided a copy of his May 5, 1992 DD Form 398 Personnel Security Questionnaire, 
submitted for his first clearance periodic review, on which he disclosed his 1989 
marijuana use and his arrest, charge, and fine for marijuana possession. (Answer; GE 
1; GE 2; GE 3; AE B; Tr. 32-35, 41-44.) 
 
 On October 23, 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged for driving under the 
influence (DUI), after he was found unconscious with a .14 BAC at a traffic intersection.1 
In preparation for his DUI court proceedings, Applicant’s attorney advised him to 
undergo a voluntary drug/alcohol assessment before being required to do so. He 
therefor underwent an assessment in November 2013, during which he disclosed that 
he had used marijuana six times during the preceding year. He said this occurred during 
various parties and social settings when he shared marijuana that was being passed 
around. Although Applicant did not report his 1989 arrest for marijuana possession 
during this evaluation, he disclosed that he had used both marijuana and cocaine while 
he was in high school. (Answer; GE 3; Tr. 35-40.) 
 
    Applicant certified and submitted his most recent periodic-review e-QIP on April 
14, 2015, in which he provided false negative responses to several questions 
concerning his past drug abuse. He disclosed his 2013 DUI arrest, but answered, “No,” 
when asked if he had ever been charged with any other offense involving alcohol or 
drugs. He also answered, “No,” to the questions asking whether he had illegally used 
any drugs in the last seven years, or while possessing a security clearance. He 
acknowledged that he should have answered these questions, “Yes,” and disclosed his 
1989 marijuana possession charge, and his 1989 and 2012-2013 marijuana use while 
holding his security clearance. He offered no credible justification for these falsifications, 
but claimed that he was not attempting to conceal or deceive the Government 
concerning his history of drug abuse. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 42-46.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on November 23, 2015, in connection with his periodic clearance 
review. He told the investigator that he had never illegally used or otherwise been 
involved with drugs or controlled substances while possessing a security clearance. 
(Answer; GE 3; Tr. 46-49.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed again on March 10, 2016, and confronted by the OPM 
investigator with a report of his 1989 arrest and charge for marijuana possession that, 
contrary to his earlier denial, occurred while he held a security clearance. Applicant 
claimed this omission from his e-QIP and interview was inadvertent, said that he had no 
                                            
1 This incident was not alleged in the SOR, which cited no security concerns under the Criminal Conduct 
or Alcohol Consumption guidelines. The DUI arrest and charge are included in these findings only to 
describe the circumstances under which his most recent admitted drug abuse came to light. Applicant’s 
conviction of this DUI charge was overturned on appeal because the arresting officer was outside her 
territorial jurisdiction when she arrested him. (AE A.) 
  
 
 
 
 
4 
similar incidents, and told the investigator that he had never bought, sold, or used any 
other illegal drugs except for his high school use of marijuana. The OPM investigator 
then confronted Applicant with his drug/alcohol assessment admission of having used 
marijuana six times during the preceding year at various social settings and parties. 
Applicant confirmed that he had done so, but declined to provide additional information 
due to his concern about jeopardizing his employment with the defense contractor. The 
OPM investigator did not, therefor, confront him about his false denial of cocaine use 
while in high school. Applicant admitted that he concealed his drug use from his 
employer and the OPM due to concerns about its adverse effect on his employment.  
(Answer; GE 3; Tr. 37-38, 49-54.)   
 
 Applicant’s most recent annual progress review described him as an excellent 
team leader with the utmost respect from management and his peers. It described his 
mentorship of less experienced employees and his availability to guide them in the right 
direction. (AE C.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 
 
 
5 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order adverse to 
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 The security concerns under the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse are set out in AG ¶ 24: 
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant was has held a security clearance since 1987. He illegally used and, 
separately, possessed marijuana in 1989. He also illegally used marijuana on multiple 
occasions during 2012 and 2013. The evidence supports security concerns under all 
three of these disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG & 26 provides two conditions that could possibly mitigate the drug-related 
security concerns raised in this case based on Applicant’s explanations: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant abused marijuana on multiple occasions in 1989, 2012, and 2013 
despite knowing that drug abuse was prohibited while holding a security clearance, by 
his employer, and under Federal law. His most recent admitted use was in late 2013. 
This pattern of drug abuse did not occur under such circumstances that recurrence 
could reasonably be found to be unlikely. Insufficient evidence was submitted to 
diminish the resulting doubts concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Mitigation under AG & 26(a) was not established. 
 
Applicant now acknowledges his illegal use and possession of marijuana over 
the course of many years while holding a security clearance, but failed to provide 
evidence of actions to overcome these problems, or establish a pattern of abstinence. 
His pattern of concealment and contradictory statements concerning his drug abuse 
greatly increases the likelihood that such abuse will recur. He never claimed to have 
permanently stopped misusing marijuana, or profess an intention not to resume such 
drug abuse in the future. He accordingly failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
Other potential mitigating conditions are inapplicable in the absence of prescription drug 
abuse or any form of drug treatment.  
 
     
 
 
 
 
7 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
 
Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2004 and 2015 e-QIP clearance 
applications, and statements during 2015 and 2016 OPM interviews concerning his 
history of drug abuse. This evidence establishes substantial security concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b), shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate such concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions. His explanations for his multiple false statements attempting to 
conceal what he admitted was knowing and wrongful drug abuse were manifestly 
deliberate. This is serious misconduct with respect to his national security eligibility, 
which he made neither prompt nor good-faith efforts to correct before being confronted 
during OPM interviews. Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate his admitted 
personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He illegally abused marijuana on multiple occasions 
while holding a security clearance for more than 25 years, and falsified several security 
clearance applications and interviews to conceal his drug abuse. He provided 
insufficient evidence to demonstrate rehabilitation or other permanent behavioral 
changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress related to this pattern of 
conduct remains undiminished, and recurrence was not shown to be unlikely.  
 
 Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for drug involvement and 
substance misuse, and personal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
