KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant further contends that his indebtedness is not an indicator of other security
concerns, such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, or substance abuse.  To the
extent that he is arguing that his financial problems do not create any security concerns, we note
the Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or circumstances
under any of its guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  Direct or objective evidence of
nexus is not required. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03319.a1
DATE: 07/30/2018
DATE: July 30, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03319
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 5, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 15, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The SOR alleged four delinquent debts, two student loans
and two bank-related debts.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the two bank-related debts
and against him on the two student loans.  The bank-related debts are not raised as an issue on
appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s unfavorable decision.  
The Judge’s Pertinent Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant, who is a 58-year-old, has been employed by a defense contractor since late 2014. 
In his response to the SOR, he admitted the two delinquent student loans totaling about $79,000.
The Judge found:
These student loans were incurred about 20 years ago, when Applicant attended
college from 1994~1997.  [Applicant] attributes this delinquency to periods of
unemployment or underemployment from the time of his graduation until his current
employment in 2014, and to a hospitalization in November of 2016.  However,
despite being gainfully employed since 2014, Applicant did not start to address his
student loans until after receipt of the SOR.  As of May 2017, Applicant paid $1,878
towards the debt, $1,569 of which were the result of “IRS Offset(s).”  I do not find
this to be a good-faith effort to address this substantial past-due indebtedness.  These
allegations are found against Applicant.1
In his analysis, the Judge noted that he considered each of the mitigating conditions under
Guideline F.  Given that Applicant’s student loans went unaddressed for about 20 years, he
concluded that none of the mitigating conditions were established.
Discussion
In the decision, the Judge noted that he left the record open until May 25, 2017, to provide
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters, and such matters were submitted.  In his
appeal brief, Applicant submitted student loan documents (Exhibit DD) that are not included in the
record and post-date the close of the record.  These student loan documents constitute new evidence
that the Appeal Board is prohibited from considering.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
1Decision at 2 (citations to record evidence were omitted).
2
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in making a finding about his age, he is 48 years old
instead of 58, and indicates that this error was likely a “typo.”  Appeal brief at 1.  We agree that this
is a harmless error because it did not likely affect the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-5184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25 2013).
In his appeal brief, Applicant contends the Judge erred in his analysis of the mitigating
conditions.  He argues the Judge did not properly consider his unemployment and underemployment, 
his health problems, and the termination of his nine-year domestic relationship.  He also argues the
Judge did not correctly evaluate his efforts to resolve other debts before addressing his student loans,
his receipt of financial counseling, his positive contributions to the community, and his
establishment of a repayment plan for the student loans.  These arguments, however, are neither
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).
Applicant further contends that his indebtedness is not an indicator of other security
concerns, such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, or substance abuse.  To the extent
that he is arguing that his financial problems do not create any security concerns, we note the
Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or circumstances under
any of its guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  Direct or objective evidence of nexus
is not required.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018).  Additionally,
Applicant argues the judge should have granted him a security clearance on a probationary basis.
Such argument fails to establish that the Judge committed any harmful error in not granting an
exception under Appendix C of the Adjudicative Guidelines.2
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
2Directive, Encl. 2, App. C.   
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale            
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
