 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03463 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 
2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 8, 2017, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on March 5, 2018, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 20, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
 
2 
 
identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. The record remained open until April 20, 2018, 
to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He submitted AE C through E, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.b and denied the remaining allegations. His 
admission is incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in June 2016. He tests software. He experienced unemployment from 
April 2016 until June 2016 and from November 2014 to February 2015. He has taken 
some college courses. He married in 1978. He has two adult children whom he still 
financially supports from time to time.1  
 
 The SOR alleged four delinquent debts totaling approximately $33,133. The 
debts were listed in credit reports from August 2016, August 2017, January 2018, and 
March 2018 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f).2  
 
 Applicant explained that that a combination of factors led to his financial 
problems. He admitted that he and his family lived beyond their means for a number of 
years between 2007 and 2014. Additionally, his wife loaned a friend approximately 
$20,000 in 2010 with the expectation that the loan would be repaid. The repayment 
never occurred. There is no documentation of this loan and Applicant did not pursue 
legal recourse against the debtor. Also, in approximately 2010, Applicant claims he 
used approximately $80,000 of his retirement funds to fund his son’s substance abuse 
treatments. He provided no documentation for this claimed expense.3  
 
 In July 2012, Applicant retained an attorney to try to resolve his debts. The 
attorney was able to settle five non-SOR debts, which Applicant claimed totaled 
approximately $10,540. His credit reports verify that at least four debts were settled in 
2013. Applicant contacted the attorney again in January 2018 and later in March 2018. 
Applicant has not paid the required retainer amount and the attorney is not actively 
working on his case now.4  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 22-23, 39-40, 48; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-24, 33-35; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 24, 43; Answer; AE A, E. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 Credit Card Debt (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant admitted he was a joint owner on this 
account opened through his wife’s former employer. The card was used for consumer 
purchases. The account was opened in 2008 and the last payment was in August 2012. 
It is a charged-off account. In 2012 or 2013, Applicant was advised by his attorney to 
send the creditor a letter to negotiate a settlement, which Applicant claimed was done. 
He received no response. His attorney recently advised him not to do anything else 
because the debt was close to being barred by the statute of limitations. This debt is 
unresolved.5 
 
 Timeshare/Retail Account (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant claimed this debt was from 
delinquent payments on a timeshare property he purchased. However, his credit report 
indicates this debt is a consumer credit card account. The account was opened in 
January 2014 and was reported delinquent in March 2014. It is in collection status. The 
debt is unresolved.6 
 
 Consumer Debt (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant admitted that this was a credit card debt 
that was used to purchase unnecessary goods. It was opened in 2013 and reported 
delinquent in February 2018. Applicant admitted his last payment on this account was 
over 10 years ago. It is in collection status. He has asked his attorney to look into 
settling this account. This account is unresolved.7 
 
 Consumer Debt (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant claims this debt derived from satellite 
TV equipment that he was told by the company was obsolete and did not need to be 
returned. He was later billed for not returning the equipment. I found Applicant’s 
explanation credible. This debt is resolved.8 
 
 Applicant did not produce a budget. At the date of the hearing he had $900 in his 
checking account and $250 in his savings account. He has $15,000 in his retirement 
account. He is current on his monthly mortgage payments. He has not sought financial 
counseling. He claims that he learned much from his financial difficulties and his family 
has adjusted accordingly. 
 
 Applicant presented character references from a work supervisor and from two 
personal friends. All described Applicant as having integrity and being trustworthy. Two 
had knowledge of Applicant working through his financial difficulties. His supervisor 
recommended Applicant receive a security clearance.9 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25, 42-43. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-28, 44. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-30, 45. 
 
8 Tr. at 26, 45; AE A. 
 
9 AE B-D. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and   
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
6 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple and, although he settled several non-
SOR debts in 2013, he has not resolved any of the SOR debts, except for SOR ¶ 1.d. 
He failed to produce evidence showing that recurrence of his financial problems is 
unlikely. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s short periods of unemployment, a loan to friends that was not repaid, 
and the additional expenses incurred because of his son’s medical issues can be 
considered circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to act responsibly by 
establishing payment plans for the identified debts. Overall, the record evidence does 
not support that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable.  
  
 Although Applicant worked with an attorney to settle five debts in 2013, he did 
not present evidence of financial counseling. Given the unpaid status of all of the debts, 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control and good-faith efforts to pay or 
resolve the remaining debts are lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant 
credibly disputed SOR ¶ 1.d and 20(e) applies to that debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service and the circumstances 
surrounding his indebtedness. However, I also considered that he has made insufficient 
efforts to resolve his debts. He has not established a meaningful track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.10   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
