 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-03732 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his unresolved 
delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 1, 2017. On 
November 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On January 17, 2018, a complete copy of the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was mailed to Applicant. He received 
 
 2
the FORM on January 22, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 
days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Items 1 through 
7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 7, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old and works as a bonding mechanic for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his employer since 2008 and requires a clearance for his 
employment. He has been married since 1997, and he has three adult stepchildren. 
Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard immediately upon graduation from high 
school in 1986, and honorably served until 1994.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial issues to two separate layoffs by his employer. 
He was laid off between January 2012 and May 2013 and between May 2015 and October 
2016. He did not seek other employment during these periods because he anticipated 
going back to work in a more timely manner. Applicant and his wife were supported during 
these periods by state unemployment benefits and savings. (Item 7 at 2) Additionally, one 
of his stepchildren has a debilitating medical condition, which has contributed to their 
financial strains. (Item 4 at 9) 
 
The fifteen debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.o total $117,544. Applicant denied 
all but six of the debts. In his Answer to the SOR, he claimed he made payment 
arrangements for SOR ¶ 1.h, paid SOR ¶ 1.m, paid ¶ 1.n through garnishment, and paid 
a portion of the property tax debt alleged SOR ¶ 1.o. He also claimed he is disputing the 
large debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. (Item 4 at 7-8) Applicant did not provide any documentary 
proof in support of these claims. 
 
Applicant provided no explanation as to why he denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 
and 1.l. Each of the alleged debts are supported by the record evidence. (Items 3, 4, 5, 
6, and 7) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”1 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”2 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”3 
                                                          
1 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
2 Egan at 527. 
 
3 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
 3
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”4 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.5 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”6 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.7 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.8 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.9 
 
                                                          
4 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
6 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
 4
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”10 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”11 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under Guideline F is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.12  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his credit reports establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or fraudulently 
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
state, or local tax as required”). 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Five are 
potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 5
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 I considered that Applicant is not required to be debt-free in order to qualify for a 
security clearance.13 Applicant was unemployed for two periods of time in the past six 
years; however, he did not meet his burden to establish that he acted responsibly to 
address his unpaid debts in a timely manner. Additionally, he failed to provide 
documentation showing he has resolved or disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), 20(e), and 20(g) was not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a security clearance. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
 
 6
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns at issue. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
