 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03623 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Allison R. Weber, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and C (Foreign Preference) by Applicant’s Israeli citizenship and ties to 
Israel. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 29, 2015, seeking to 
continue a security clearance he has held since October 2003. On November 15, 2017, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for 
all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.  
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on January 18, 2018. On January 22, 2018, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on February 3, 2018, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. The case was assigned to an 
administrative judge on April 12, 2018, and reassigned to me on July 18, 2018, because 
of workload.  
 
Evidentiary Issue 
 
The FORM included Item 7, a summary of an interview by a security investigator 
in January 2017. The summary was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on 
the accuracy of the summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or 
object to consideration of the summary on the ground that it was not authenticated. 
Applicant submitted a detailed response to the FORM but did not comment on the 
accuracy or completeness of the summary, nor did he object to it. Although pro se 
applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 
2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). I conclude that Applicant waived any objections to the 
summary of his January 2017 interview. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Israel. (FORM Item 8.). I took administrative notice as requested. Because the 
documents submitted by Department Counsel focused on the adverse information about 
Israel but provided minimal favorable information about the overall relationship between 
the United States and Israel, I took administrative notice sua sponte of the facts set out 
in the U.S. Department of State fact sheet, U.S. Relations with Israel, May 14, 2018, 
which is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX ) I. I notified Department Counsel 
of my intention to take administrative notice of the facts recited in HX I, and she did not 
object. (HX II.) The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of 
fact. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Answer), he admitted all the allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 5) 
unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
 3
Applicant is a 78-year-old information technology specialist employed by federal 
contractors since September 2003. Although his employer, a management consulting 
company, holds contracts with the DOD, Applicant works on a contract supporting 
another government agency whose mission is to conduct humanitarian projects related 
to economic growth, education, and the environment in foreign countries. He is a 
software designer and systems analyst. His work involves strategy, planning, and 
training for the agency’s humanitarian mission and includes technical advice on the 
agency’s internal practices such as the management of official-business travel. (Answer 
at 42.) His work is sensitive, but he does not handle classified information. However, a 
security clearance is a condition of his employment. (Answer to SOR at 36; AX A.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife are native-born U.S. citizens. They married in August 1968 
and have a 45-year-old son, a native-born U.S. citizen residing in the United States. 
Applicant holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in mathematics and a doctorate in 
anthropology.  
 
Applicant and his wife resided in the United States until they moved to Israel in 
1982. They became Israeli citizens in 1985 under the Israeli “Law of Return,”2 but they 
retained their U.S. citizenship. Between 1982 and 1988, Applicant worked for two Israeli 
companies that held defense contracts as well as commercial contracts. In his first job, 
his employer held defense contracts, but he worked only on automated bakery software. 
In his second job he worked on optical technology (“smart” eyeglasses containing 
miniature computers). This employer collaborated extensively with the U.S. military, and 
the optical technology was eventually provided by Israel to the United States Air Force.  
 
Applicant and his wife moved back to the United States in 1988, and from 1988 
to 2003, he worked as a software engineer for several non-government, private-sector 
companies in the United States. In late 2008, he and his wife moved back to Israel, 
where they now reside. They visit the United States at least twice a year for a month or 
two each time. (FORM Item 4 at 37.) Applicant teleworks from his home in Israel but 
travels frequently to the United States in connection with his work. He and his wife 
owned a home in the United States until they sold it in June 2015. They still own a 42-
acre property in the United States. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is in poor health. She was hospitalized at the time the SOR was 
issued, and Applicant was unwilling to travel to the United States for an in-person 
hearing at that time. His wife is still in poor health, but is receiving medical care at home 
in Israel. Applicant has adhered to his decision to forego an in-person hearing in the 
hope that a hearing on the record will expedite a decision. He has been suspended from 
his job since the SOR was issued. The administrative correspondence regarding his 
decision to forego an in-person hearing is attached to the record as HX III. 
 
 Applicant and his wife own a home in Israel, which is worth about $421,000 in 
U.S. dollars. Because they reside in Israel, they have made and maintained Israeli 
friends, including a retired software engineer, previously employed by an Israeli 
                                                          
2 The “Law of Return” allows all Jews to immigrate to Israel and obtain Israeli citizenship. 
 
 4
aerospace company, who retired about six months before Applicant received the SOR. 
The friend has no current connection to Israeli defense contractors, Israeli intelligence, 
or the Israeli government. (FORM Item 4 at 38.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife live in Israel because of their religious attachment to the 
country. They have not decided whether they will remain in Israel or move back to the 
United States. (FORM Item 4 at 39.) When Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator in January 2017, he told the investigator that if he came to a “crossroads” 
between the requirement that he hold a security clearance and his unwillingness to 
renounce his Israeli citizenship, he would retire from his U.S. employment and live in 
Israel. (FORM Item 7 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s salary is deposited directly into a U.S. bank. He has a credit card 
issued by the same bank. He maintains a bank account in an Israeli bank, in which he 
maintains a balance of about $3,000 (U.S.) for living expenses. (FORM Item 4 at 38.) 
 
 As a citizen of Israel, Applicant was required to serve in the Israeli Defense 
Forces. He never served on full-time active duty, but he served as a reservist, trained in 
disaster relief, from 1983 to 1988, when he was “aged out.” (FORM Item 4 at 38.) 
 
 In August 2008, Applicant obtained an Israeli passport. (FORM Item 7 at 1.) He 
also exercised his Israeli citizenship by voting in Israeli elections in January 2013. 
(FORM Item 7 at 2, 5.) Neither circumstance is alleged in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant’s performance review for the period ending in December 2015 rated 
him as “excellent” in all performance categories and recommended that he receive a 
bonus. (Answer at 42.) Appended to his Answer are numerous testimonials from 
colleagues and friends who all describe him as trustworthy, ethical talented, 
compassionate, and loyal to the United States. A retired U.S. foreign service officer who 
has known Applicant for 35 years describes him as “an individual of the highest moral 
character and ethical practices,” who is “at heart an American citizen who has Israeli 
citizenship, not [vice] versa.” (Answer at 44.) A co-worker who has known Applicant for 
11 years describes him as “a trustworthy and loyal American citizen and a highly valued 
professional colleague.” (Answer at 46.) 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy. The United States was the first country to 
recognize Israel as a state in 1948, and the first to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of 
Israel in 2017. Israel is regarded as the United States’ most reliable strategic partner in 
the Middle East. The United States and Israel have close cultural, historic, and political 
ties. They participate in joint military planning and training, and have collaborated on 
military research and weapons development. The United States is Israel’s largest single 
trading partner. (HX I.) 
 
Israel has been identified as a major practitioner of industrial espionage against 
U.S. companies. There have been numerous instances of illegal export, or attempted 
 
 5
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel and instances of Israeli 
sales of sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party countries. (FORM Item 8.) 
 
Israel generally respects the rights of its citizens. When human-rights violations 
have occurred, they have involved Palestinian detainees or Arab-Israelis. Terrorist 
suicide bombings are a continuing threat in Israel, and U.S. citizens in Israel are 
advised to be cautious. (FORM Item 8.) 
 
 Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship or have a claim to 
dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes. U.S. 
citizens visiting Israel have been subjected to prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches by Israeli authorities upon entry or departure. Dual U.S.-Israeli citizens must 
enter and depart Israel using Israeli passports. (FORM Item 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
 6
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant and his spouse are dual citizens of the United 
States and Israel who live in Israel for part of each year (SOR ¶ 1.a); that they have 
friends who are citizens and residents of Israel, including one friend who is employed by 
an Israeli defense contractor (SOR ¶ 1.b); that they maintain a bank account in Israel 
with an balance of about $3,000 in U.S. dollars (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that they own a home 
in Israel worth at least $421,000 in U.S. dollars (SOR ¶ 1.d).  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d are established by Applicant’s admissions. SOR ¶ 1.b is 
not fully established, because Applicant’s friend is no longer employed by an Israeli 
defense contractor and has no current contacts with the Israeli government, intelligence 
agencies, or military services.  
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
 7
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The following potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a), (e), and (f) all require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in living under a foreign government.  
 
The evidence does not support a finding of “heightened risk” in this case. Israel is 
a friendly country, and Applicant has not been involved in high-technology, dual-use 
technology applicable to military equipment since he terminated his employment with an 
Israeli defense contractor in 1988. His current employer is not involved in the 
development, import, or export of military equipment or dual-use technology. He is a 
systems analyst who develops education and training programs for international 
humanitarian programs provided by the other government agency without a military 
component. There is no evidence that Israel threatens, abuses, or otherwise mistreats 
its citizens as a tool for industrial espionage. 
 
 The absence of a “heightened risk” also negates the likelihood of the conflict of 
interest contemplated by AG ¶ 7(b). Applicant is not involved in formulating U.S. military 
policy or planning. He is not involved in development of military or dual-use technology, 
military planning, or military intelligence. Instead, he provides internal management 
 
 8
advice and information technology support for an agency with a humanitarian mission. 
Thus, a conflict between the interests of the United States and Israel is unlikely. 
 
The potential conflict of interest discussed during the security interview in 
January 2017 was whether he would be willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship in 
order to retain his security clearance, and he responded that he would retire from his job 
rather than renounce his Israeli citizenship. Since renunciation of his Israeli citizenship 
is not a requirement for retaining his security clearance, there is no conflict of interest 
within the meaning of AG ¶ 7(b). Thus AG ¶ 7(b) is not established. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant and his spouse moved to Israel in 1982 with the 
intention of living there permanently, and that they obtained Israeli citizenship in 1985 
(SOR ¶ 2.a); that Applicant served in the Israeli Defense Forces from about 1983 to 
1988 (SOR ¶ 2.b); and that Applicant worked in Israel for Israeli defense contractors 
from about 1982 to 1998 (SOR ¶ 2.c).  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a is not fully established. The evidence does not establish the allegation 
that Applicant intended in 1982 to living permanently in Israel, because he and his wife 
returned to the United States in 1988 and lived in the United States for 20 years before 
returning to Israel. The evidence establishes that Applicant moved to Israel in 2008 and 
that at some time thereafter, perhaps when they sold their U.S. home in 2015, they 
seriously considered living permanently in Israel. 
 
 The allegation in SOR 1.c that Applicant worked for an Israeli defense contractor 
until 1998 rather than 1988 is apparently a typographical error. The evidence shows that 
he returned to the United States in 1988 and began working for a software developer for 
fitness programs in the United States. He has not worked on any U.S. or Israeli defense 
contracts since 1988. 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 9:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 
 9
The following potentially disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 10(a): applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country;  
 
AG ¶ 10 (b): failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an 
appropriate security official, the possession of a passport or identity card 
issued by any country other than the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 10(c): failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the 
U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 10(d): participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, position, 
or political office in a foreign government or military organization . . . ; and 
 
AG ¶ 10(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country in violation of U.S. law.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(d) are established. Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen 
who applied for and received Israeli citizenship and served in the Israeli Defense 
Forces. AG ¶¶ 10(b), 10(c), and 10(e) are not established. There is no allegation in the 
SOR and no evidence that Applicant failed to disclose his possession of an Israeli 
passport, failed to use a U.S. passport to enter the United States, or used his Israeli 
citizenship to protect financial assets in Israel in violation of U.S. law. 
 
The following mitigation conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 11(a): the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
AG ¶ 11(b): dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the 
foreign citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign 
citizenship do not present a national security concern; and 
 
AG ¶ 11(f): the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, 
entity, or association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
 AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(e), and 11(f) are established, because none of Applicant’s 
activities are in conflict with U.S. interests and because Applicant’s affinity for and 
connections to Israel pose a low national security risk, due to the nature of his current 
employment and the absence of the “heightened risk” discussed in the above 
 
 10
discussion of Guideline B. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(c) are not established because 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, chose to move to Israel and apply for Israeli 
citizenship, and he is unwilling to renounce it. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant is 78 years old and 
nearing retirement. He was granted a security clearance in 2003, after he lived in Israel 
for six years, became an Israeli citizen, and served in the Israeli Defense Forces. His 
employer is aware of Applicant’s continuing ties to Israel and continues to sponsor him 
for a clearance. Applicant has strong ties to both the United States and Israel, and at 
present he stands with one foot in each country. His attachment to Israel is primarily 
religious, not political. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to sell his home in the United States and live in Israel 
suggests a preference for Israel. His statement to a security investigator that he would 
give up his job and live in Israel if confronted with a requirement to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship also suggests a preference for Israel. However, his tentative preference for 
Israel, standing alone, does not conflict with the national security concerns of the United 
States. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B 
and C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his Israeli citizenship, service in 
the Israeli Defense Forces, residence in Israel, and his tentative preference for living in 
Israel. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 11
 Paragraph, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
