1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-00619 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern stemming from his problematic financial history. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
          On March 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 3, 2017, and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
          On June 15, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing, and the exhibits offered by the Government were 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
admitted into the record without objection. (Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5.) The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on June 25, 2018. At the request of Applicant, 
without objection, the record remained open until July 2, 2018. Applicant timely submitted 
documents that I marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C and have been 
admitted into the record without objection.    
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”2 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.3 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).4 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were in effect at the time. My Decision and Formal 
Findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guideline 
F.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 57 years old, has been separated from his spouse since November 
2011 and has an adult daughter and an adult stepson. He has a General Equivalency 
Diploma and has completed one semester of college. When Applicant and his spouse 
separated, he was making about $45,000 per year, and she was making about $80,000 
to $85,000 per year. Since November 2012, he has worked for a defense contractor. 
Applicant’s current salary is $65,000 per year.5 
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling $24,856, of which $24,238 is an 
overdue balance on a home equity line of credit.6 Applicant denied the home equity debt 
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
5 Tr. 7, 8, 21-23, 38; GE 1.  
 
6 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c. 
 
3 
 
and a $200 delinquent traffic ticket. He admitted a $418 medical debt.7 Both of the denied 
debts are, however, supported by the record.8  
 
Applicant testified that the home equity line of credit was taken out before he and 
his spouse separated in 2011. They used the proceeds for home improvements and 
repairs. Both his name and his spouse’s name are on that line of credit. When they 
separated, Applicant and his spouse agreed that she would keep the home and make the 
home equity payments.9 In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documents 
showing monthly payments Applicant’s spouse made on the home equity loan from 
February 2017 to June 2018 ($150 per month).10 The record also shows that the balance 
due on that loan declined from $24,238 in March 2017, when the SOR was issued, to 
$22,759 on the March 2018 credit report. That credit report also showed the date of last 
payment to be in January 2018. Because there is always a lag between the date a 
payment is made and the date that payment is reported, it appears that Applicant’s 
spouse is keeping current and reducing the balance on that loan.11 The spouse’s payment 
history is evidence of the agreement about which Applicant testified.  
 
With respect to the medical debt alleged in SOR 1.b ($418), Applicant submitted a 
document showing that he successfully disputed that debt, and it has been deleted from 
his credit file.12 Applicant did not provide documents showing the resolution of the $200 
traffic ticket alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
                                                          
7 Answer ¶¶ 1.a-1.c. 
 
8 GE 3 through 5. 
  
9 Tr. 24-26. The record shows that the home equity line of credit was taken out in June 2006. GE 5.  
 
10 AE B and C.  
 
11 SOR ⁋ 1.a; GE 5; Tr. 28-29.  
 
12 AE A; Tr. 31-32.  
4 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
      Discussion 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has a number of delinquent debts, which 
purportedly raise a security concern under Guideline F. The financial considerations 
security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18, which in pertinent part, states: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  
 
 Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
5 
 
delinquent debt and other security-significant financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s 
self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.13 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection process. Rather, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal financial 
obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.14 Here, Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility was called into question by his past financial problems and, 
primarily, by his failure to stay current on his home equity loan. I conclude that 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. The next inquiry is whether any 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
It is clear that the only material debt is the home equity loan that Applicant and his 
spouse took out in 2006. When they separated in 2011, Applicant and his spouse agreed 
that she would keep the house and its attendant expenses, including the payments on 
the home equity loan. This made sense, because at the time Applicant’s spouse was 
making almost double what Applicant was making per year. The record indicates that 
Applicant’s spouse has kept up those payments and has reduced the balance due. The 
marital separation in 2011 is a condition unlikely to recur and was beyond Applicant’s 
control. The agreement Applicant reached with his spouse about the home equity loan 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
14 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
6 
 
was responsible conduct by Applicant under the circumstances. That debt is mitigated 
under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b).15 
 
     Conclusion 
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.16 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:        For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                          
15 Applicant successfully disputed the medical debt alleged in the SOR, which mitigates that debt under AG 
¶ 20(e). The $200 traffic ticket is de minimis and does not raise any security concern.  
 
16 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
