 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03660 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. She mitigated the Guideline E, personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2018, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on March 1, 
2018. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, 
provide documentary evidence, or object to the Government’s evidence, and it is 
admitted. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a and denied the allegation in ¶ 2.a. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. She has never married and has no children. She is a 
college graduate and has earned various culinary and food service certificates. She 
owned a business in 2010, but closed the business in favor of full-time employment in 
2016. She currently works part-time for two companies.1  
 
 The SOR (¶ 1.a) alleges that Applicant failed to file her 2014, 2015, and 2016 
federal income tax returns, which she admitted. She did not provide a response to the 
FORM or any documentary evidence to show that her federal income tax returns have 
been filed for those tax years.2  
 
 In September 2016, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
In it she failed to disclose she did not file her federal income tax returns for tax years 2014 
and 2015.3  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2017. When 
questioned, she voluntarily disclosed to the investigator that she failed to file her 2016 
federal income tax return. She explained to the investigator that she did not file because 
she was not financially stable and did not have any money. She told the investigator she 
had not resolved the delinquent tax filing, but planned to do so once she obtained a full-
time job. Applicant did not disclose to the investigator that she also had not filed her 2014 
and 2015 federal income tax returns. On December 4, 2017, she verified and swore that 
the results of her interview were accurate.4 
  
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she stated: 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Item 4. I have not considered any derogatory information for disqualifying purposes that was not alleged 
in the SOR. I may consider information for the purposes of making a credibility determination, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in my whole-person analysis. 
 
4 Item 5.  
 
3 
 
 
When asked the question “In the past (7) years have you failed to file or pay 
federal, state or other taxes when required by law or ordinance” I mis-read 
the question. Within, the last (7) years I have paid my taxes prior to 2014, 
2015, and 2016. Also I do plan to pay taxes for these years.5 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on her February 17, 2016 
SCA that she did not file her 2014 and 2015 Federal income tax returns. The 
Government’s evidence included a September 2016 SCA. It does not include a February 
2016 SCA as alleged. Federal tax returns for tax year 2015 would not have been due until 
April 15, 2016.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to file 2014, 2015, and 2016 federal income tax returns. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
Applicant did not provide an explanation for her failure to file her federal income 
tax returns for 2014, 2015, and 2016, other than to tell the investigator that she was not 
financially stable to do so for her 2016 return. That answer only addresses her ability to 
pay taxes and not her ability to file the returns. Her tax issues are unresolved and the 
evidence does not support a finding that her behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply. Applicant failed to provide evidence that she has made arrangements to comply 
with her legal tax obligations. There is insufficient evidence that her ability to file was 
beyond her control or that she has received financial counseling and there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(g) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 16, and the following may be 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
 
6 
 
 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence. The Government’s evidence does not 
support that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her failure to file her 2014 and 2015 
federal income tax returns on her February 17, 2016 SCA. The documents provided do 
not include a February 2016 SCA. Federal income tax returns for 2015 are not due until 
April 2016. I find the above disqualifying condition does not apply. I find in Applicant’s 
favor under this guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old educated women. She failed to file her federal income 
tax returns for 2014, 2015, and 2016. She did not provide evidence that she has 
subsequently complied with her legal obligation.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
 
7 
 
 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 7 
 
Applicant has not met her burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. I find in her favor under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
