 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03981 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and it was received by Applicant on 
February 21, 2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
 
2 
 
 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 9. Applicant did not provide a 
response to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 9 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel submitted Items 10 and 11, which requested 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about the countries of Egypt and Iraq. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the requests that are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government 
publications and those that were provided with the FORM. The facts are summarized in 
the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He was born in Iraq. He graduated from high school in 
Iraq in 2004. He attended college in the United States, but did not earn a degree. He has 
never married and has no children. He has worked for federal contractors in the past.1  
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen of Iraq and resides in Egypt. His father was employed 
as a high level official with the Iraqi Intelligence Service. In 2006, Applicant’s father and 
family were threatened by insurgents in Iraq. Applicant, his mother, and four siblings fled 
Iraq to Syria, where they were refugees. Applicant worked as a cashier in Syria to support 
his family. He and his family were interviewed by the International Organization for 
Migration, which sponsored them in 2009 to move to the United States. Applicant’s 
mother remains an Iraqi citizen, but resides in the United States as a permanent resident. 
She resides with Applicant. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2016. His four 
siblings reside in the United States. Two are U.S. citizens, and the other two remain Iraqi 
citizens, residing in the U.S. 
 
 Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85) on August 
21, 2010. In it he disclosed that his father lived in Jordan. Applicant completed a Counter-
Intelligence Screening Questionnaire (CISQ) on August 28, 2010. In it he again disclosed 
his father lived in Jordan and had worked for the Iraqi Intelligence Service from 1983 until 
2008. Applicant did not know what his father did for the Iraqi Intelligence Service. He 
disclosed that his father did not go to Syria with his family and did not come to the United 
States. When interviewed at the time, he could not explain why his father did not 
accompany his family to Syria.2 
 
                                                          
1 Item 7. 
 
2 Items 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2016, Applicant completed another CISQ and subsequent interview. 
Applicant explained his father did not accompany the family to Syria because his father 
was missing. He did not disclose this during his earlier interview. Applicant also provided 
different accounts of the length of his father’s service with the Iraqi Intelligence Service. 
In his 2010 interview, Applicant disclosed his father stopped working for Iraqi Intelligence 
in 2008, and his father was living in Jordan as a tile-worker. In his 2016 CIS investigation, 
he told the investigator that in approximately June 2010, his mother received word from 
family members that his father was living in Egypt. Applicant also said that his father 
worked with the Iraqi Intelligence Service until November 2010. On his November 2016 
security clearance application (SCA), Applicant stated that his father left his job with the 
Iraqi government in November 2010. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his 
father remained in Iraq with the Iraqi Intelligence Services until he received threats. 
Applicant said that on October 3, 2010, his father left Iraq for Egypt. During his December 
2016 interview he stated he did not know if his father received any pension from the Iraqi 
government. In his answer to the SOR, he said his father did not submit a resignation 
from his Iraqi job and lost his pension. Applicant stated in his answer that he did not have 
any information about his father’s job and what his responsibilities and duties were while 
a member of the Iraqi Intelligence Service.3 
 
 During Applicant’s August 2010 CIS interview, he told the investigator that in 2010 
his father applied for refugee status to come to the United States and his mother 
submitted an application for a green card for his father. During his 2016 CIS interview, he 
told the investigator that he submitted the paperwork to sponsor his father to come to the 
United States during the same time. He said that the paperwork was approved, but due 
to the Arab Spring uprising and turmoil in Egypt, his father has been unable to leave.4   
 
 In 2012, Applicant and his brother began sending money to their father in Egypt. 
They sent monthly payments of $500 or $750 for his father’s rent and living expenses. 
Applicant said he stopped sending money to his father after he started working for the 
U.S. Army in June 2017. His two brothers and sister are now supporting their father. He 
estimated he sent about $30,000. During his December 2016 CIS interview, Applicant 
said he had refiled the paperwork in November 2016 for his father to move to the United 
States. Applicant maintains weekly telephonic contact with his father. His mother who 
lives with him also has regular contact by telephone with Applicant’s father in Egypt. 5 
 
Iraq6 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all travel to Iraq. The ability of 
                                                          
3 Items 2, 4, 6, 7, 9.  
 
4 Items 4, 9.  
 
5 Items 2, 7, 9. 
 
6 Item 11. 
 
 
4 
 
 
the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens outside Baghdad is 
extremely limited given the security environment. The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria 
(ISIS) controls a significant portion of Iraq’s territory. Within areas under ISIS control, the 
Iraqi government has little or no ability to control and ensure public safety. 
 
 Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq, including ISIS. Such 
groups regularly attack both Iraqi security forces and civilians. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may also threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. U.S. 
Government and western interests remain possible targets for attacks.  
 
 The U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. 
government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under 
strict security guidelines.  
 
 There are significant human rights problems in Iraq to include: sectarian hostility, 
widespread corruption, lack of transparency at all levels of government and society that 
have weakened the government’s authority and worsened effective human rights 
protections. Iraqi security forces and members of the Federal Police have committed 
human rights violations to include killing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. ISIS is also 
responsible for human rights abuses. There are also problems that include harsh and life-
threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities, arbitrary arrest and lengthy 
pretrial detainment, denial of fair public trial, limits on freedom of expression, freedom of 
the press, censorship of religion, limits on peaceful assembly, and societal abuses of 
women.  
 
Egypt7 
 
 The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens of threats from terrorist 
groups in Egypt and to consider the risks of travel to the country. U.S. citizens have been 
kidnapped and murdered by terrorist and extremist groups. Several terrorist groups, 
including ISIS, have committed multiple deadly attacks in Egypt, targeting government 
officials, security forces, public venues, tourist sites, civil aviation and other modes of 
public transportation, along with diplomatic facilities. U.S. citizens remain at risk as ISIS 
uses kidnapping for ransom to finance their operations. Due to security concerns, U.S. 
diplomatic personnel are prohibited from travel to parts of Egypt and U.S. citizens are 
warned to avoid those areas.  
 
 Extremist organizations operate in Egypt and ISIS has called on supporters to 
attack U.S. citizens and coalition partners. ISIS media has threatened that places 
associated with Westerners, Christians, the Egyptian military and police, and Egyptian 
government facilities could be struck at any time. Authorities believe there is continued 
likelihood of such potential attacks. These terrorist groups use conventional and 
nonconventional weapons to target U.S. Government interests and private interest.  
 
                                                          
7 Item 10. 
 
5 
 
 
 Political protests occur without warning throughout Egypt and have led to violent 
clashes between police and protestors resulting in death, injuries, and property damage.  
 
 Egypt’s human rights problems involve the excessive use of force by security 
forces, including unlawful killings and torture; and deficiencies in due process, including 
excessive use of preventive custody and pretrial detention, use of military courts to try 
civilians, trials of hundreds of defendants in which authorities did not present evidence on 
an individual basis, suppression of civil liberties, including societal and government 
restrictions on freedom of expression, the press, and peaceful assemble and association. 
There are also problems with arbitrary arrests; a politically motivated judiciary; restrictions 
on academic freedom; impunity for security forces; limits on religious freedom; and 
violence, harassment, and societal discrimination against women and girls. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
6 
 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” 
denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under 
a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq 
and Egypt because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against 
U.S. citizens. There are serious concerns in both countries about terrorist activities that 
target Westerners and Americans. Extremists associated with various terrorist groups 
including ISIS are active throughout both countries. The State Department’s reports on 
human rights for Iraq and Egypt notes there are widespread problems involving lack of 
due process; restrictions on individual freedoms; violence against women and girls; 
killings; kidnapping; and extorting civilians. ISIS is also responsible for human rights 
abuses. 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Iraq and resident of Egypt. He was employed in a 
high level job with the Iraq Intelligence Service. Applicant could not provide specific 
information about the nature and details of his father’s job. Applicant provided financial 
support for his father from 2012 until 2017. He maintains weekly telephonic contact with 
him. Applicant’s mother, who lives with him, also has regular telephonic contact with her 
husband. Applicant’s relationship with his father creates a heightened risk and a potential 
foreign influence concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
8 
 
 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant financially supported his father for several years. He and his mother 
maintain weekly contact with his father in Egypt. Applicant has applied for his father to 
immigrate to the United States. Applicant’s relationship with his father is more than casual 
and his contacts with him are frequent. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s father served with the Iraqi Intelligence Service from at least 1983 until 
2010. Applicant gave conflicting information about his father’s term of service and his 
whereabouts, or continued connections with the Iraqi government. Applicant indicated 
that his family fled to Syria because they were threatened, but his father did not 
accompany them. He did not know why. He then said his father was missing. There is 
insufficient information about Applicant’s father, his job, and potential continued 
connections in the intelligence field. There is also inconsistent information about where 
Applicant’s father was living during different periods of time, be it Jordan, Iraq, or Egypt. 
I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of his father and the interests of the United States. This risk is 
significantly greater because his father’s career in the Iraqi Intelligence Service and 
because the threats he received from insurgents. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2016. He is single. His mother lives with 
him and is a permanent resident of the United States. In the past, he provided financial 
support for his father. His siblings are now providing this support. Both Iraq and Egypt 
continue to have significant terrorist activity that specifically targets Americans. 
Applicant’s father has already experienced threats from insurgents when he was in Iraq. 
Applicant has a close relationship with his father. It is too great of a burden to expect him 
to be loyal to the interests of the United States and resolve any conflicts in favor of the 
United States over those of his father. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2016. He 
has a strong family tie to his father who is a citizen of Iraq and resides in Egypt. There 
are too many unknown facts about Applicant’s father’s position in the Intelligence Service 
to know the extent that his position could create a vulnerability to foreign influence and 
exploitation. It is too great a burden to expect Applicant to resolve a conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States instead of his father. The heightened risk raised by Applicant’s 
father in Egypt continues to raise security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, 
and are unmitigated. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
