 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02285 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Benson, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
            Statement of the Case 
 
On April 18, 2016, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 19, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 16, 2017, and requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of hearing. On November 28, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM, which he received on December 13, 2017. 
Applicant did not submit an objection to Government Exhibits (Items) 1 through 4, nor 
did he provide a supplemental response to the FORM. GE Items 1 through 4 are 
admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR. All the 
allegations alleged familial connections to India, Applicant’s country of birth. (Items 1-3)  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and works for a defense contractor. He emigrated from 
India to the United States in September 1995 when he was 22 years old. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. He has had a U.S. passport since 2008. His Indian 
passport was cancelled after he became a U.S. citizen. (Items 3-4) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was born in India, but she is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
They have been married since 2001. His two children, ages 11 and 7, were born in the 
United States. His immediate family members reside in the United States. (Items 3-4) 
 
 Applicant’s two brothers, one sister, mother-in-law, three sisters-in-law and three 
brothers-in-law all live in India and are citizens of that country. Applicant’s eldest brother 
is self-employed. His younger brother works for a technology company in India. 
Applicant’s sister is a homemaker and his mother-in-law is a retired school librarian. 
Two of Applicant’s sisters-in-law are homemakers, and the third sister-in-law is 
employed as an accountant. Applicant’s three brothers-in-law are self-employed, a 
research analyst, and an accountant. (Items 3-4) 
 
 Applicant’s listed family members do not work for, or have connections with, the 
Indian government. Applicant provides financial support to his siblings in the amount of 
approximately $500-$1,000 quarterly due to their poor financial situation. The money is 
used to help their children attend school. He maintains weekly-to-monthly telephonic 
contact with his other relatives listed in the SOR. He travelled to India in 2012 for three 
weeks and in 2013 for ten days. Applicant’s parents are deceased. His father-in-law is 
also deceased. (Items 3-4)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
        Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request in the brief that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to India. The request and the attached documents were 
admitted into evidence as Item 5. The facts administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
India is the most populous democracy in the world. There have been incidents in 
the past when parties in the United States attempted to illegally export military or dual-
use technologies to India, such as microwave amplifiers and missile components. There 
have been numerous and recent criminal cases concerning export enforcement, 
economic espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions 
involving the government of India, private companies, and individuals. Finally there are 
concerns with widespread human-rights problems.  
 
India and Pakistan have been locked in a tense rivalry since the partition of the 
subcontinent after the end of British rule in 1947. These two countries have engaged in 
three wars since 1947 over Kashmir and Jammu, both Indian states. The U.S. State 
Department strongly recommends avoiding travel in these areas by U.S. citizens.  
 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect 
U.S. citizens. In 2015, terrorists attacked a border security force killing two security 
personnel. Attacks in 2012 and 2013 show India remains a target for these groups.  
 
A 2017 U.S. State Department report detailed significant human rights problems 
in India with police and security force abuses, corruption in all levels of the government, 
and various types of violence. Discrimination and violence against women remain a 
serious problem.  
 
In 2015 the United States and India signed a “Declaration of Friendship” because 
India is growing as a trade partner with the U.S. The two countries are to cooperate on 
energy, defense, and homeland security. (Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 7 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
5 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. A disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “contact .  .  . with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). In addition, AG ¶ 7(b) provides that 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individuals’ obligation to protect classified or sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group or 
country by providing that information or technology.” Applicant has both contact with 
and connections to family members in India. 
 
 Applicant has contact with his sister, brothers, and mother-in-law on a frequent 
basis. His contact with his three brothers-in-law and three sisters-in-law is not as 
frequent, however, there is family contact. Therefore, AG ¶ 7(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant’s familial connections to his siblings and to his wife’s family in India 
create the potential for a conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and his possible desire to assist his Indian relatives 
by providing that information. AG ¶ (b) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 lists two potential conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since immigrating in 1995. He became a 
U.S. citizen in 2008. He owns a home in the United States. His contact with his siblings 
and in-laws is ongoing, but those contacts do not overcome his loyalty to the United 
States. Applicant’s family members are not involved in governmental work in India. They 
have positions in India that make it unlikely that he would be placed in the position of 
having to choose between his relatives’ interests and those of the United States. 
Applicant’s connections to the United States after 23 years are stronger than his familial 
ties to India. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States based on his 20-year work history. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):   
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s foreign contacts resulted 
from his birth in India. His children were born here, his family resides here, and he 
voluntarily became a U.S. citizen in 2008. There is no evidence that he has ever taken 
any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. There is no derogatory 
information about him in the record. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-d:   For Applicant 
   
                             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
