 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03482 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 10, 2016, 
requesting a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. On October 20, 2017, the 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
November 17, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1  
 
The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 22, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for March 15, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted several documents 
marked as AE F that were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old general maintenance worker, employed by a 
government contractor since 2015. He previously operated a lawn-care business from 
2000 to 2011, and worked for another employer from 2010 to 2015. He graduated from 
high school in 1993. He married in 1999 and separated in 2017. He has four children 
ages 8 to 19, that live with him. He does not currently hold a security clearance. 
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling nearly $43,478. Applicant admitted 
all of the debts, and provided explanations with his answers and a statement. Applicant 
fell into debt in about 2000 while operating a lawn-care business that did not generate 
sufficient income to sustain his family’s financial obligations. In addition, his spouse did 
not have steady work income and they purchased a home at auction that required 
Applicant to take additional loans to finance unexpected repairs. Applicant’s spouse was 
unemployed from 2010 to 2015, and part of 2016-2017. He is now separated from his 
spouse, and she does not contribute money to pay family expenses. 
 
 The status of the SOR debts are as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a was a business loan that Applicant was unable to pay due to insufficient 
income. He spoke with the lender while he was underemployed, but was unable to make 
the requested payments. Applicant again met with the executive vice president, and 
discussed a payment plan in accordance with his debt resolution program. The lender 
agreed and Applicant began good-faith payments on this loan in April 2018. The payment 
amount will increase as other debts have been satisfied. Applicant intends to continue 
payments until the entire debt is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b was paid through a payment plan with the final payment made in March 
2018. The debt is resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is a medical debt listed in a credit report, but Applicant has been unable 
to locate the creditor. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d is a medical collection. Applicant arranged a monthly payment 
schedule, and has paid the first installment. The debt is being satisfied. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e is a medical debt listed in a credit report, but Applicant has been unable 
to locate the creditor. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f is a collection by an insurance provider that was settled and paid in full 
in March 2018. This debt is resolved. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g is a medical collection. Applicant arranged a payment plan in November 
2017, began payments, and has four payments remaining. This debt is being satisfied. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h is a medical collection that was paid in full in two installment payments 
in 2017 and has been resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i is a television service provider collection account that was paid in March 
2018 and resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j is a credit card collection that was paid and resolved in March 2018. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k – o are small medical collection accounts that were paid in 2017. All of 
the debts have been resolved. 
 
 Applicant has been utilizing a debt-resolution program since 2014, offered by a 
nationally recognized author and debt-resolution advisor. Applicant is using the “debt 
snowball” method of repayment of past-due debts, which provides for resolution of smaller 
debts before tackling larger obligations. Applicant has a budget and savings of about 
$2,900. He has a monthly net remainder of $300-$500 after paying expenses. Applicant 
contemplated filing bankruptcy, but since he acknowledged the debts as his own and 
feels responsible to repay them, he declined to file. He has instead negotiated 
repayments directly with creditors whenever possible. He has sufficient resources to 
repay his debts while also maintaining his family’s expenses without help from his spouse. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts following the loss of steady paying 
employment, purchasing a home that required unexpected repairs, and the loss of family 
income from his spouse. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his inconsistent pay from a lawn-care 
business, unexpected expenses for home repairs, and the loss of spousal contributions 
to household income. Once he was hired in a better paying position with a government 
contractor in 2015, he was able to gain control of his finances and make substantial 
progress toward satisfying his debts. He provided evidence of actions taken with regard 
to the SOR debts and his financial status is now good. I believe Applicant’s financial 
management has significantly improved and his finances are now under control. Although 
he continues to carry some delinquent debt, he has begun the process of resolving his 
remaining debts through payment plans that he is able to maintain. The likelihood of a 
recurrence of financial difficulty is low. Applicant’s past financial issues no longer cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) - (d) are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s testimony and 
documents provided during and after the hearing. Applicant has shown current financial 
responsibility and appears to have control of his finances. He is able to meet family 
financial obligations while eliminating the remaining debts. He has shown the qualities of 
financial responsibility that is expected of clearance holders, and I am convinced that he 
has shown good-faith efforts to resolve his debts, and that he will complete all repayment 
plans per his agreement.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
