 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-03619 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant is making payments to his student loan debt and mitigated the 
potential security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 8, 2015. On 
October 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On December 15, 2017, a complete copy of the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant. The FORM 
 
 2
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Items 1 
through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection. He timely submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
May 7, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 57 years old and works as an information assurance analyst for a 
defense contractor. He has worked for his employer since August 2016, and requires a 
clearance for his employment. He has been married since 1987, and he and his wife have 
two adult children. Applicant graduated from high school in 1979, attended U.S. Army 
courses during his military service, and received an associate’s degree in approximately 
2005. He served in the U.S. Army and the Army National Guard on and off between 1980 
and 2012, when he received an honorable discharge. He has held a security clearance 
in the past. 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to several periods of unemployment. He 
was unemployed in 2007, 2009, and between July 2011 and October 2011; December 
2012 and February 2013; July 2013 and June 2014; June 2015 and August 2015; and 
November 2015 and January 2016. (Item 1, Item 2 and Item 3 at 3) Applicant also 
experienced other periods of underemployment and part-time employment. 
 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts totaling over $82,000. In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant stated he is paying $500 a month to the $66,277 student loan alleged in 
¶ 1.a. (Item 1)  In his Response to the FORM, Applicant provided a December 22, 2017 
pay stub reflecting a payment for this debt. He is paying $258 per paycheck. As of 
December 22, 2017, the pay stub reflected 12 payments, totaling $3,103 for the year. 
Applicant struggled to pay this debt due to his various periods of unemployment and this 
debt became delinquent in approximately October 2014. (Item 5 at 1)   
  
 Fourteen of the debts alleged in the SOR are for medical bills, totaling $7,577. 
Applicant states that ¶ 1.d. is related to a workers’ compensation claim and he is not 
responsible for this debt. (Item 3 at 16) He believes SOR ¶¶ 1.m. and 1.n. are duplicates; 
however, in the credit bureau reports the debts have different account numbers, indicating 
they are not duplicates. (Items 4 and 5). Applicant was unaware he had an outstanding 
judgment for a medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.r.).  
 
The remaining medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.l., 1.o., 
and 1.p.) are related to unpaid co-pays. The majority of these debts became delinquent 
between 2000 and 2015. There is no evidence that Applicant has incurred any delinquent 
debts since starting his current employment in August 2016. He has expressed an intent 
and a desire to pay and resolve these medical debts. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed he was unaware of the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. Based upon account information in the credit reports, this $8,477 debt 
 
 3
appears to be the balance for a vehicle loan. Applicant voluntarily turned in a vehicle for 
repossession in approximately January 2016. He was unable to maintain the payments 
due to employment issues. (Item 2 at 50, Item 3 at 16 and 22, Item 4 at 5, and Item 5 at 
2 and 3) 
 
Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k. He contacted Defense Finance Accounting 
Services and learned that this debt was for a life insurance policy; however he claims he 
never held a life insurance policy while he served in the military. (Item 3 at 16) He denied 
SOR ¶ 1.q. because he has never held an account with this creditor.  
 
Starting in 2005, Applicant was only able to make partial mortgage payments. He 
tried to sell his home and unsuccessfully tried to modify the loan. This home was 
foreclosed on in 2008, and the mortgage was satisfied. (Item 2 at 49-50 and Item 3 at 15 
and 23) 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant maintained that he is current on the 
majority of his debts and some of the SOR allegations are duplicates. (AE A) The majority 
of his debts appear to have become delinquent between approximately 2010 and 2015. 
Applicant was unemployed for large stretches of time during this period.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”1 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”2 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”3 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
1 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
2 Egan at 527. 
 
3 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 4
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”4 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.5 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”6 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.7 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.8 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.9 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”10 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”11 
 
  
                                                          
4 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
6 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under Guideline F is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.12  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, his credit reports, and the remaining exhibits establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three are 
potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, . . .), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicants are not required to be debt-free in order to qualify for a security 
clearance.13 In this case, Applicant struggled financially several years ago due to 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
13 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a security clearance. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
 
 6
employment issues. The documentation he presented shows he is making payments 
toward his largest and most significant debt. His debts are not related to frivolous or 
irresponsible spending. Rather, due to a lack of steady and consistent income he was 
unable to pay for his student loan, his vehicle, his home, and medical bills. There is no 
evidence he irresponsibly generated credit card debt, personal loans, or other non-
essential financial obligations. Additionally, he has not incurred any new delinquent debts 
in over two years. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) was established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns at issue. 
Accordingly, Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.s.:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
