 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03211 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a Federal tax lien entered against him 
in November 2010, in the amount of $17,180. He was also alleged to have filed Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in January 2012. He is resolving his Federal tax debt and has no other 
delinquent accounts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
February 6, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 14, 2018. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented six documents, 
which I marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. They were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was left open for receipt of additional 
documentation until April 16, 2018. On March 25, 2018, Applicant timely submitted one 
additional document, which was marked and admitted without objection as AE D. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 23, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied the allegation in SOR 
¶1.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since October 2014. He served in the Army 
National Guard from 1991 to 1994. He is married and has two minor sons. (GE 1; Tr. 26-
30.) 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to a business downturn. He purchased 
a 50% ownership share in a karate studio franchise in 2007. Due to unforeseen 
circumstances including the nationwide recession, the student enrollment at the studio 
declined and the business began losing money. His net income was gradually reduced to 
only $400 per month. He started taking on credit card debt to make ends meet. He left 
the business franchise in January 2012. (GE 2; Tr. 21-43.) 
 
 Applicant felt burdened by his growing debt and spoke to a neighbor, who was an 
attorney about his situation. The attorney suggested he file for bankruptcy. In January 
2012, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He listed liabilities of $278,053, which 
included dischargeable debt like a business loan of $175,000, credit card debt, and 
medical debt, as well as non-dischargeable debt including his wife’s student loans and 
$18,964 debt owed to the IRS. He was granted a discharge in April 2012. (GE 3; Tr. 21- 
43.) 
  
  Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a Federal tax lien filed against him in 
November 2010 in the amount of $17,180. This debt was the result of unpaid income 
taxes from 2007, 2008, and 2010. Applicant explained that when he first acquired the 
50% business share in the karate studio in 2007, the franchise changed from paying him 
as an employee to paying him as a contractor and unbeknownst to him, stopped 
deducting payroll taxes from his checks. That led to an unexpected tax debt that Applicant 
could not afford to pay when he timely filed his 2007 Federal income tax return. As the 
financial problems with the business grew, Applicant also experienced difficulties paying 
his income taxes for 2008 and 2010. He had an installment plan with the IRS to resolve 
the 2007 tax delinquency, but with the business in trouble, he defaulted on that 
agreement. (Tr. 19-47.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified he has had an active installment agreement with the IRS since 
at least 2015. He makes monthly payments of $278. IRS records reflect he reduced his 
Federal income tax debt to: $740 for 2010; $1,823 for 2008; and $1,621 for 2007. He is 
current on his payment agreement. Applicant intends to continue making monthly 
payments until the debt is fully resolved. (GE 4; AE A; AE B; AE D; Tr. 50-54.) 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report, dated September 8, 2017, reflected all 
consumer accounts were in good standing. He testified he files his Federal and state tax 
returns as required by law. He has sufficient withholdings deducted from his paycheck to 
resolve his annual income tax obligations. (GE 4; Tr. 54-58.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
4 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  A Federal tax lien was entered against Applicant in 2010 for unpaid income taxes, 
from 2007, 2008, and 2010, in the amount of $17,180. He also availed himself of the 
protections of Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012, after experiencing significant financial 
difficulties due to a failed business. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were the result of a business downturn. That decline 
led Applicant to close his business and incur debt. He was unable to resolve his Federal 
tax debt and delinquent consumer debts at the time of the business’ failure. He did his 
best to address the Federal tax debt, as it arose, but was unable to do so. He has been 
repaying his Federal tax delinquencies since at least 2015. He has reduced his debt from 
$17,180 to $4,184, through monthly payments of $278. He has an established track 
record of making his monthly payments as agreed upon. He has no delinquent consumer 
debt. Under the circumstances, Applicant has acted responsibly. He made a good faith 
effort to repay his debts. Future financial problems are unlikely. All of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
acted reasonable and responsibly in resolving his Federal tax debt and by discharging 
debt through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy, given the circumstances with his failed business. 
He now works as a full time employee and has sufficient income to cover his expenses. 
Future financial problems are unlikely. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
