 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-02079 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that she was unable to make payments or 
otherwise resolve five debts in the statement of reasons (SOR). Financial considerations 
security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On December 2, 2015, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) 
On August 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992, and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A 
the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 
2017. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On September 27, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On November 1, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On January 24, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On April 3, 2018, the 
 
2 
                                         
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for April 18, 2018 using video teleconference. (HE 1) Applicant waived any issue 
regarding insufficient notice of the date, time, and place for his hearing. (Tr. 14-15) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 12, 16-17; GE 1-4) On May 1, 2018, DOHA received the hearing transcript. 
Applicant did not provide any evidence after her hearing. The record closed on July 18, 
2018. (Tr. 29-30)  
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 
and 1.g. She denied the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h. (HE 3) She also provided 
mitigating information. (HE 3) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and she has been employed as a security officer for a 
government contractor since November 2014. (Tr. 7, 19; GE 1) In 1998, Applicant 
graduated from high school, and she attended college for a time. (Tr. 7-8) She served in 
the Army from 1998 to 2004; her military occupational specialty (MOS) was aviation 
operations specialist (15P); she left active duty as a specialist (E-4); and she received an 
honorable discharge. (Tr. 8) In 2010, she married, and her three stepchildren are ages 
17, 18, and 22. (Tr. 9)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is about $22,000. (Tr. 20) Her husband is unemployed. 
(Tr. 20) She had periods of unemployment and underemployment. (SOR response; GE 
1) Her two stepdaughters are receiving Social Security disability and sometimes 
contribute to the household expenses. (Tr. 20) After paying monthly expenses, Applicant 
has little left over to pay her debts. (Tr. 21)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleged eight delinquent debts totaling $26,481, and they are as 
follows: (1) a debt relating to lease of an apartment for $1,113 placed for collection (Tr. 
21-22); (2) a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $118; (3) a medical debt 
placed for collection for $79; (4) a judgment on a student loan for $17,694; (5) a charged-
off debt for $6,810 resulting from a loan for a vehicle, which was voluntarily repossessed 
or possibly stolen (Tr. 27-28); (6) an amusement park debt placed for collection for $418; 
and (7)-(8) two telecommunications debts placed for collection for $176 and $73. 
 
In September 2017, Applicant sent a total of $45 to six SOR creditors in money 
orders of $5 or $10 each, and she provided copies of the money orders as part of her 
SOR response. (Tr. 21; SOR response) For each of the six debts, she said “I am currently 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
making payments to satisfy this debt. (SOR response) She said she made some other 
payments; however, she did not bring receipts to her hearing. (Tr. 21) She did not make 
any payments to the five SOR creditors in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e after September 2017. (Tr. 
23-24) She did not have funds left over after paying expenses to address her SOR debts. 
(Tr. 25) 
 
Applicant said she disputed her responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a because 
she believed she was unfairly evicted from her apartment. (Tr. 22) She did not have a 
copy of her dispute documentation; however, the dispute was noted on her credit report. 
(Tr. 28-29) 
 
In 2004, Applicant received student loans from her attendance of training in 
massage therapy, resulting in a judgment on a student loan for $17,694. (Tr. 26) In 
September 2017, she sent a $10 payment to the creditor. (Tr. 27)   
 
Applicant provided a receipt showing a zero balance owed for the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.f, an amusement park debt placed for collection for $418. (SOR response) Applicant 
contacted the creditor for the telecommunications debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($176) and 1.h 
($73). (Tr. 24) The creditor was unable to locate the accounts. (Tr. 24) 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
 
4 
                                         
 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
 
5 
                                         
 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,2 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
                                            
2 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant presented some mitigating evidence. Applicant and her husband were 
underemployed or unemployed at times, and her stepdaughters are disabled. These are 
circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances. She does not 
receive full mitigating credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because she did not act responsibly under 
the circumstances. She did not receive financial counseling. I have credited Applicant 
with mitigation of the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. 
 
Applicant paid a total of $45 to the five creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e and 
one other creditor in September 2017 in $5 or $10 increments. She indicated she was 
“currently making payments” to the creditors. She did not adequately explain why she did 
not make any payments to the SOR creditors in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e after September 2017. 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater progress 
resolving the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. There is insufficient assurance that these 
five SOR debts are being or will be resolved in the near future. Under all the 
circumstances, she failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
                                         
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and she has been employed as a security officer for a 
government contractor since November 2014. In 1998, Applicant graduated from high 
school, and she attended college for a time. She served in the Army from 1998 to 2004; 
her MOS was aviation operations specialist; she left active duty as a specialist; and she 
received an honorable discharge. In 2010, she married, and her three stepchildren are 
ages 17, 18, and 22.   
 
Several circumstances beyond her control adversely affected her finances. 
Applicant and her husband were underemployed or unemployed at times, and her 
stepdaughters are disabled. Her income is limited, and she has difficulty paying her 
monthly expenses.  
 
Applicant paid $45 to address the five delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e 
and one other creditor in September 2017. She did not establish she had insufficient 
income to make any payments after September 2017. Her actions show a lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h:  For Applicant 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
