 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00972 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 4, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) approved on December 10, 2016, superceded 
and amended the previous AG, effective on June 8, 2017. I reviewed both AG. The 
outcome of this case would have remained the same under either set of guidelines.  
    
 On May 24, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 22, 2017. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on December 4, 2017. A 
hearing convened on February 14, 2018, but was cancelled because Applicant was no 
longer sponsored for a security clearance. Applicant found another sponsor and the 
case was reopened and assigned to me on May 3, 2018.  A notice of hearing was 
issued on May 16, 2018, scheduling a new hearing on June 13, 2018. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4.  Applicant testified and offered seven  
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – G. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on June 21, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a future employee of a DoD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. If she receives a security clearance, she will be hired by the DoD contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer since November 2017. Her current job does 
not require a security clearance. She served on active duty in the United States Marine 
Corps from 1998 to 2002. She separated in the rank of Sergeant with an honorable 
discharge. She has held a security clearance in the past. She has a bachelor’s degree. 
She is twice divorced, and is currently in a cohabitation relationship. She has a son, age 
18, and a daughter, age five. Her current partner has a daughter, age 5. (Tr. 19 - 26; 
Gov 1)   
 
On October 25, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as 
part of a periodic reinvestigation. (Gov 1) A subsequent security clearance background 
investigation resulted in the  following SOR allegations: a $15,790 car loan that was 
charged off in April 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 4 at 5); a $15,538 car loan that 
was charged off in August 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 2); a $2,998 apartment rental 
debt placed for collection in June 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 2); a $2,134 apartment 
rental debt placed for collection in November 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 4 at 4); 
a $1,202 cell phone account placed for collection in August 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.e:  Gov 2 at 
2; Gov 4 at 4); and a $797 cell phone account that was more than 120 days past due as 
of September 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 2)  
 
Additional delinquent debts include a $657 cable television account that was 
placed for collection in April 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.g:  Gov 2 at 2); a $603 satellite television 
account placed for collection in 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.h:  Gov 5 at 3); a $500 apartment debt  
placed for collection in June 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.i:  Gov 2 at 2); a $150 medical debt that 
became delinquent in December 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.j:  Gov 2 at 2); a $7,014 federal tax lien 
entered against Applicant in tax year 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.k:  Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 3); and a 
$26,676 tax lien filed against Applicant for tax year 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.l:  Gov 2 at 4; Gov 3; 
Gov 4 at 3). 
 
From May 2009 to April 2011, Applicant worked for a contractor overseas. She 
earned approximately $94,000 annually. When she returned to the U.S., she worked for 
another contractor from May 2011 to May 2013. A new contractor was awarded the 
contract in June 2013. She continued in the same position with the new contractor from 
June 2013 to June 2016. She earned approximately $113,000 annually. In June 2016, 
the security office received notice of a financial issue and laid off Applicant. She was 
unemployed from June 2016 to November 2016. (Tr. 26-29, 49-50) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Between November 2016 and June 2017, she was employed part-time at a job 
which paid her $11 an hour. She trained to be security officer for five weeks without pay. 
She worked a part-time job at a retail store at night.  In November 2017, she received 
full-time employment as a data technician at an hourly wage of $21. After her 
deductions and child support her monthly take home pay is $1,750.  Her current 
sponsor will hire her full-time at an annual salary of $56,000 if she receives a security 
clearance. She is actively looking for better employment activities. She will be able to 
pay her debts once she receives a security clearance and gets a better paying job. (Tr. 
30-33) 
 
All of her delinquent debts were incurred before she was laid off in June 2016. 
She has had difficulty paying the debts because of unemployment and under 
employment.  Her second spouse incurred a lot of debt without Applicant’s knowledge. 
This led to Applicant filing for divorce in 2015. Their divorce was final in 2017. 
(Response to SOR; Gov 2-4)    
 
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR are:   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $15,790 charged-off account owed after a voluntary car 
repossession: In her response to the SOR, Applicant indicated she was going to offer to 
pay $20 a month towards this account. She purchased the car in 2010. She could not 
afford the payments and turned the car into the dealer. She has not made any 
payments towards the debt. She claims the debt is no longer listed on her credit report 
because it is more than seven years old. (Tr. 34-35)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $15,538 charged-off car loan: Applicant purchased this car in 2015. 
Someone co-signed the car loan because she had bad credit. She got behind in making 
payments while in the process of her second divorce. Her ex-wife wanted the car and 
agreed to make the payments. Her ex-wife made the payments for several months, but 
then dropped the car off in front of Applicant’s home. Applicant could not afford to make 
the payments because she lost her job so she turned the car into the dealer. In May 
2018, she offered to pay $20 a month on this debt, but the lender told her they wanted  
a higher payment. Applicant is unable to make payments on this debt. (Tr. 36-39) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i:  $2,998 and $500 owed to an apartment complex:  Applicant 
testified that she gave the apartment complex 60 days notice that she was moving out 
of the apartment as required in the lease agreement and that the apartment complex 
improperly charged her an additional month’s rent. She has been paying $20 a month 
towards this debt since December 2017. She missed a payment in May. She did not 
provide documentation that she was making payments. (Tr. 39–41)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $2,134 debt owed to an apartment complex:  Applicant broke her 
lease early because she was in a bad relationship. She moved out in December 2011 or 
early 2012. She intends to pay $20 a month towards this debt. She had no repayment 
agreement and had not made any payments towards this debt. (Tr. 41-42) 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $1,202 cell phone account placed for collection: In July 2017, 
Applicant agreed to pay $25 a month towards this debt. She has not made a payment 
since March 2018. She believes this debt arose from her ex-wife purchasing a cell 
phone account and plan without Applicant’s knowledge. (Tr. 43-44) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $797 cell phone account that was more than 120 days delinquent as 
of February 2017.  Applicant intended to pay $10 a month towards this debt. She has 
been unable to work out a payment plan with the debtor. (Response to SOR; Tr. 45)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g:  $657 cable television account placed for collection:  In her response 
to the SOR, Applicant admits to the debt and planned to pay $5 per month until it was 
paid in full. She hoped to resolve the debt by January 2018. During the hearing, 
Applicant claimed that her ex-wife opened the account in Applicant’s name without 
Applicant being aware of it. The account is unresolved.  (Response to SOR; Tr. 45-46) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  $603 satellite television account:  In response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted to the debt and planned to pay $5 a month towards this debt. Applicant 
testified that the debt is for equipment that Applicant did not return when she abruptly 
broke her apartment lease in 2012. No payments have been made on this debt. 
(Response to SOR; Tr. 47) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j:  $150 medical debt placed for collection: Applicant believes that she 
paid this debt. She did not provide proof that the debt was paid.  (Tr. 48) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: $7,014 federal tax lien entered against Applicant in 2010: Applicant 
believed this was a state tax debt owed for personal property taxes in 2009. She is 
paying $20 a month towards that debt. The record evidence indicates it is a federal tax 
debt. The status of the debt is unknown. (Response to SOR; Tr. 49-50) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l:  $26,676 federal tax lien entered against Applicant in 2013. In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant said this was a consolidation of debt owed for tax years 
2008 through 2010. She originally had a payment plan with the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) for $200 a month in 2011. She made payments for about a year and then 
defaulted on the payment plan. The IRS would not let her enter into another payment 
plan. She has not been able to make payments towards this debt. During the hearing, 
she claimed this federal tax debt arose as a result of earning significantly more income 
while working overseas and following the advice of the contractor she worked for as to 
how many exemptions to claim.  She could not afford to pay the tax debt. (Response to 
SOR; Tr. 49-54) 
  
Currently, Applicant lives “paycheck to paycheck.” She has no savings. She 
testified that if she gets her security clearance back, she would be able to earn enough 
income to pay her debts. She has not attended formal financial counseling. She 
received advice from a friend who was a financial officer in the U.S. Navy.  She has also 
watched YouTube videos on how to deal with debt. (Tr. 56-63)  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems since at least 2010 when a $7,014 tax 
lien was filed against her. The total tax debt owed to the federal government is $33,690.  
The SOR alleged two voluntary automobile possessions which totaled $31,328. Her 
remaining debts include $5,632 related to two broken apartment leases, and $3,409 in 
consumer debt. The total amount of the delinquent debt is over $74,000. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(b), 19(c), and 19(d) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
 
7 
 
 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
With regard to Applicant’s federal tax debts, the emphasis of the DOHA Appeal 
Board on security concerns arising from tax cases is instructive. See ISCR Case No. 
14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (reversing grant of security clearance and stating, 
“His delay in taking action to resolve his tax deficiency for years and then taking action 
only after his security clearance was in jeopardy undercuts a determination that 
Applicant has rehabilitated himself and does not reflect the voluntary compliance of 
rules and regulations expected of someone entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR 
Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance and emphasizing the applicant’s failure to timely file and pay taxes); See also 
ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance, and stating “A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”).  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control:  
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. 
None of the debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because Applicant’s financial situation was adversely 
affected by her divorces, as well as her unemployment and underemployment between 
June 2016 to the present. These circumstances were beyond Applicant’s control and 
adversely affected her ability to pay her bills. However, this mitigating condition is given 
less weight because Applicant incurred most of the debt when she was earning a high 
income as a contractor overseas and in the years following her return from overseas 
before being laid off. Circumstances beyond her control affected her ability to pay off 
her debts. However, it does not explain her inability to pay or enter into agreements to 
pay her federal income tax debts and other debts that became delinquent before she 
was laid off.  I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances 
because she has not been proactive in resolving her debts over a long period of time. 
Many of the debts were ignored for years. While her unemployment and 
underemployment affected Applicant’s ability to repay her debts, she has a history of 
financial irresponsibility going back several years. For this reason AG ¶ 20(b) is given 
less weight.      
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant did not take a formal financial counseling 
course. Her debts remain unresolved.  
 
 AG & 20(d) does not apply because Applicant has not demonstrated a good-faith 
effort to resolve her delinquent debts. While Applicant intends to pay her debts in the 
future if she is granted a security clearance, a promise to pay in the future is not 
sufficient to mitigate security concerns raised under the financial considerations.  
 
AG & 20(g) does not apply because Applicant’s federal tax debts remain 
outstanding.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service in the 
United States Marine Corps and her work as a federal contractor. I considered 
Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment between June 2016 and the present. I 
considered Applicant’s claims that her ex-wife incurred several debts without her 
knowledge. However, Applicant incurred most of the debts alleged in the SOR to 
include the substantial federal income tax debt. Most of her delinquent debts were 
accumulated years before she encountered unemployment and underemployment. 
Security concerns under financial considerations are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.l    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
