 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 17-03247 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns related 
to unresolved delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on October 21, 2017, and requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
On November 28, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by her on December 5, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely 
submitted a response to the FORM that I marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Neither 
party objected to the submission of the exhibits. Items 1 through 8 and AE A are admitted 
into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case 
to me on April 9, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and divorced. In 2014, she began working for her current 
employer, a federal contractor. Prior to this position, she worked for other federal 
contractors since 2006 and experienced several periods of unemployment in between 
those years.  Before that, she worked for another federal agency and held a security 
clearance with that agency for over 20 years. She has held a security clearance since 
2010. (Item 3) 
 
 In November 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) for 
re-investigation. (Item 3) Applicant was subsequently interviewed by a government 
investigator in July 2016 and June 2017. During the July 2016 interview, she stated that 
she was a victim of identity theft since 2006 and after the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) data breach. She stated that since 2015 or 2016 she was on a payment plan with 
her state to pay state taxes owed from 2010 or 2011. She indicated that she was paying 
$100 to $200 per month and owed $1,600. She attributed this debt to a period of 
unemployment. In reviewing her credit report, she stated that she did not recognize 
numerous medical bills, a telephone debt, and other debts. She denied owing money for 
a car loan and stated she disputed the amount. She believes some debts arose from 
identity theft. (Item 8; AE A) 
 
 During a June 2017 background interview, Applicant confirmed the information she 
discussed in her previous interview. She stated she never filed a police report regarding 
identity theft. She said she filed a dispute letter with the credit bureaus in August 2016 
regarding debts that appeared on her credit report. She indicated that she had not 
followed up with that letter or further investigated the debts listed on her credit reports. 
She had not made arrangements to address any of those debts because she did not 
believe they were her responsibility, including the car loan she said she paid. She said 
she voluntary returned the car after her July 2016 interview. (Item 8)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from August 2017 and November 2015 and 
court documents, the SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts that arose between 2012 and 
 
 
3 
 
 
2017 and totaled $29,891. (Items 4, 5, 6, 7) In her Answer, Applicant denied all 11 SOR 
allegations. She stated as follows:  
 
 (1.a) The alleged $2,899 balance owed to the state for unpaid income taxes for 
2010 or 2011 is incorrect and that she has been making payments on the 2013 lien; 
 
 (1.b) She did not owe the $1,463 judgment owed to an automobile company 
because she was not properly served; 
 
 (1.c) She disputed the $14,457 automobile loan with a consumer federal agency 
on the basis that she paid the loan and that she never saw this claim; 
 
 (1.g) She denied owing the $573 telephone bill and disputed it with a consumer 
federal agency because she said she paid it. 
 
 (1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h-1.k) She denied responsibility for all of these medical debts, 
stating that two of them were paid by hospitals, and she did not recognize the other ones. 
(Item 2) 
    
 Applicant did not provide documentary evidence to confirm her assertions that she 
was paying the 2013 tax lien, had paid any debt, or had successfully disputed any of 
them. There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. 
She did not provide a budget or other information related to her financial obligations and 
solvency from which to determine her current financial reliability and judgment. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
 
4 
 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.1  
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Four may potentially apply:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2010 and continues to the present. They include a state tax lien for unpaid 
income taxes, a judgment and miscellaneous debts. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s ongoing unresolved delinquent debts cast doubt on her current 
reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant attributed her income tax 
problems to a period of unemployment, which may have been a circumstance beyond her 
control in relation to that debt. She did not provide evidence that she had attempted to 
responsibly manage her tax obligations prior to the state’s lien being filed. She denied 
current responsibility for all other alleged debts. Applicant claimed her identity was stolen, 
but failed to provide clear evidence that she made a report to the police, or took other 
actions to address it. She did not provide substantiating documents from the credit 
bureaus showing she contacted each one about her identity being stolen and their 
responses. AG ¶ 20(b) provides limited mitigation for the tax lien debt. It does not apply 
to the other debts. There is no evidence that Applicant participated in credit or financial 
counseling. She failed to provide documentary evidence to show that the delinquent debts 
are being resolved and under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. She did not submit 
sufficient evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve any of the alleged debts. Nor did she 
submit proof that she has a payment plan with the state to resolve the 2013 tax lien, and 
is making payments, as asserted. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 20(d) or 20 (g).  
 
In her Answer and response to the FORM, Applicant contended that she disputed 
10 of the 11 SOR-alleged debts. Although she provided information that she filed disputes 
with a credit bureau in August 2016 and a federal consumer agency in December 2016, 
she did not submit sufficient proof that any of those debts were found not to be her 
responsibility or were successfully resolved through the dispute process. The evidence 
does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual who has worked for the federal government for 
many years, during which time she has held security clearances. In the FORM, she was 
informed that the evidence she submitted in her Answer to the SOR was likely insufficient 
to mitigate the financial allegations. Despite that notice, she did not provide additional 
documentary evidence to confirm her assertions that she was resolving, had resolved, or 
had obtained recent and credible proof that the majority of the alleged debts were not her 
responsibility. The absence of mitigating evidence for the Guideline F allegations compels 
a finding that she failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
