 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04382 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 10, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on May 1, 2018, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 16, 2018. The Government offered five 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on June 5, 2018, to allow 
 
2 
 
the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant 
submitted five Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 
1.a., through 1.e., which were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 11, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old.  He is engaged to be married, and has two young boys.  
He has a high school diploma.  He holds the positon of Logistician with a defense 
contractor on a Navy base.  He seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with 
his employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to four separate creditors totaling 
approximately $28,159.  In his Answer, Applicant admits each of the allegations.  Credit 
reports of the Applicant dated March 9, 2016; November 27, 2017; and April 26, 2018 
reflect that each of these debts were owing at one point.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4, 
and 5.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since January 2016.   
 
 Applicant explained that in 2012, at the young age of 18, he was in a serious car 
accident, and was injured, and lost his job.  He spent about three months recuperating, 
and was supported only by welfare during this period.  During this period, he incurred 
debt that he was unable to pay.  In 2013, he started working again, but did not realize 
the extent of his indebtedness.  It was only in February 2016, when he began working 
for a defense contractor, and needed a security clearance, that he became aware of the 
delinquent debt listed on his credit report.  Since then, he has been working diligently to 
pay off his delinquent debt and clean up his credit report. 
 
 1.a. Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an auto loan that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $14,156.  Applicant testified that at the age of 18, he co-
signed for a vehicle for his girlfriend, who is now his fiancé.  The vehicle later broke 
down, and she did not have the money to repair it so she returned the car.  When she 
returned the car, she owed about $7,000 on the loan.  Interest continued to accumulate, 
and at one point, Applicant owed as much as $14,000 on the loan.  Applicant never 
made any payments on the debt; but in February 2018, he contacted the lien holder and 
they agreed to lower the debt to $6,800 from $14,000.  Applicant is currently paying 
$100 monthly toward the debt to resolve it.  (Tr. pp. 19-20.)  Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit 1.a., indicates that Applicant has completely resolved the debt.    
 
 1.b.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an auto loan placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $12,237.  Applicant was in a car accident in 2012.  He has 
full coverage insurance on his car; but because he never contacted the insurance 
company, they never issued the check to pay off the lienholder.  Applicant recently 
 
3 
 
contacted the lienholder who settled the matter for $7,700.  Applicant paid the claim by 
borrowing money from a friend, and then reimbursed his friend when he received the 
payment check from the insurance company.  The matter has been completely 
resolved.  (Tr. p. 22.)  Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1.b., indicates that Applicant has 
completely resolved the debt. 
 
1.c.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical bill in the amount of 
$1,451.  This medical bill was from the car accident in 2012.  Applicant testified that he 
thought the insurance company had paid the debt.  He contacted the creditor, and 
settled the debt for $435.  He borrowed the money to pay the debt from a friend.  
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1.c., indicates that Applicant has completely resolved 
the debt. 
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the 
amount of $315.  Applicant explained that he took out a small loan in 2012 to move out 
of the state.  He paid the debt off in full in the amount of $315.  Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit 1.d., indicates that Applicant has completely resolved the debt.     
 
 Applicant testified credibly that he has learned a serious lesson from this 
experience.  He is now more mature and is very careful about how he spends his 
money.  He does not spend money that he has set aside to pay bills with. He no longer 
has any delinquent debt or past-due accounts.  He now follows the advice of his friend 
and financial counselor, who has helped him in getting his financial affairs stable and in 
order.  After taxes, Applicant brings home about $2,400 a month, and his fiancé brings 
home about $1,200.  They each pay their own bills.  Applicant’s expenses are 
reasonable, as his car payment is $178 monthly, he and his fiancé split the rent of 
$1,300 monthly, and he is making his regular $100 monthly payment to the creditor set 
forth in allegation 1.a.  The only other payments he has on a monthly basis is for his 
cable and insurance bill, both of which are current.  He also owes his friend $435 that 
he plans to pay off soon.  Applicant states that once he pays her off, he plans to start a 
savings account.  He also plans to continue to live within his means, by following a 
budget, to avoid any financial problems in the future.   
 
 A friend of the Applicant, who serves as a mother figure to him, and who 
considers him like a son to her, testified that she has been counseling him in financial 
management and helping him to resolve his debt.  She has known the Applicant for 
many years, and can attest to the fact that he is responsible, trustworthy and reliable.  
Any money she has loaned him in the past, he has always paid back to her in a timely 
fashion.  She has been teaching him the importance of having good credit, and that he 
must continue to be responsible in paying his bills to be successful.  She stated that 
Applicant has shown great financial growth and maturity in all areas of his life.  She 
highly recommends him for a security clearance. 
 
 Two letters of recommendation from professional associates and friends of the 
Applicant attest to his trustworthiness and honesty.  They also discuss his dedication, 
loyalty, and hardworking nature.  One of them states that because of his youth, and 
inexperience, Applicant did not understand the severity of not paying his bills and was 
 
4 
 
not aware that he had the accident-related bills until the background investigation 
concerning his application for security clearance.  He now understands the significance, 
and the consequences of not being responsible and has resolved his delinquent debts.  
In their opinion, Applicant is considered to be a worthy candidate for a security 
clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1.e.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.  Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  Affluence 
that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security 
concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant was injured in a car accident in 2012, and was unable to pay his debts.  
He incurred a number of delinquent debts, several of which he was not aware of until 
the security clearance application process.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
In 2012, at the young age of 18, Applicant was injured in a car accident and lost 
his job.  While he recovered, he was supported by welfare.  He incurred debt that he 
could not afford to pay.  He also did not know about the extent of his indebtedness until 
his security clearance investigation.  Since learning of his debt, he has worked diligently 
to resolve it.  At this point, he has completely resolved the debts listed in the SOR, and 
he has no other delinquent debt.  Since he started working for a defense contractor in 
2016, and understanding how important it is to live within his means and pay his bills on 
time, Applicant has demonstrated financial responsibility.  He is now on the correct 
financial path and is learning more each day on how to improve his financial standing.  
He has acted reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances. He has 
demonstrated good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  The Financial 
Considerations concern has been mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
