 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-04158 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his security violations 
and falsifications. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) and Guideline K (Handing Protected Information).1 Applicant responded to the 
SOR on April 10, 2018, and he elected a determination with a hearing. On May 29, 2018, 
a notice of hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for June 12, 2018. The hearing 
proceeded as scheduled. Applicant testified and submitted no documents. Department 
Counsel submitted four documents, which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, without objection. DOHA received the transcript on June 25, 2018. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based on Applicant’s two security violations 
and two falsifications. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2002 and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2011. From April 2012 to January 2015, Applicant was employed as 
an engineer for a DOD contractor. He was granted a DOD secret clearance in August 
2013. When initially hired at the DOD contractor, Applicant worked only a few weeks for 
Supervisor #1, after which he was assigned to another department. After about a year, 
he returned to the first department, now under the direction of Supervisor #2, where 
Applicant remained until he resigned in January 2015. Applicant testified that he was 
repeatedly mistreated by Supervisor #2.2  
 
 In August 2014, Supervisor #2 placed Applicant on a 90-day performance-
improvement plan (PIP) due to unsatisfactory work performance. Applicant disagreed with 
Supervisor #2’s characterization of his work performance and disputed the merits of the 
PIP. At the December 2014 conclusion of the PIP, Supervisor #2 determined that 
Applicant had not fulfilled the requirements of the PIP and that his work performance 
remained unsatisfactory. Shortly thereafter, Applicant voluntarily resigned his 
employment for a position elsewhere.3 
 
 In April 2014, Applicant committed a security violation when he included 
confidential information in a document that was emailed over an unclassified network. 
Applicant admitted that he knew the information included in the document was 
confidential and that he did not adhere to the required procedures for protecting this 
information. He received a written reprimand for this security violation, and he was 
required to complete remedial security training.4 
 
 In November 2014, Applicant emailed a presentation containing confidential 
information over an unclassified network. He included a document without reading it, 
missing the classification markings. Applicant received a written reprimand for this 
security violation, and he was required to complete remedial security training. Both the 
DOD contractor and the Defense Security Service (DSS) determined that a loss had 
occurred due to the insertion of classified material on an unclassified system and 
transmission over an unclassified network.5  
 
 On June 6, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). On 
the SCA, Applicant responded “NO” to the following queries: 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1, GE 2; Answer. 
 
3 Tr. 36-41, 57; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. 31-33. 
 
5 GE 3, GE 4. 
 
3 
 
 Section 13C – Employment Record 
 
For this employment have any of the following happened to you in the last 
seven (7) years? 
 
• Fired 
• Quit after being told you would be fired 
• Left by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of 
misconduct  
• Left by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance 
 
For this employment, in the last seven (7) years have you received a written 
warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for 
misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of a policy? 
 
 Applicant did not list his two security violations, his two written reprimands, or his 
PIP on his SCA. Under Section 13A of the SCA, Applicant was required to list his 
supervisor to verify his employment. Applicant listed Supervisor #1, his former supervisor, 
and not Supervisor #2, as his supervisor for verifying his employment. Applicant testified 
that he listed Supervisor #1 because he believed that Supervisor #2 was biased and 
would be a bad reference.6 
 
 During his August 2017 security interview, Applicant admitted that he had resigned 
from his employment with the DOD contractor in January 2015. When questioned whether 
he had received a written warning, reprimand, or disciplinary action in the workplace, 
Applicant denied any such occurrence. He was then confronted with the November 2014 
security violation, written reprimand, and remedial security training. Applicant admitted 
these circumstances, but claimed that he misinterpreted the SCA query and did not 
believe it applied to his security violations and reprimands because his clearance had not 
been suspended as a result of the November 2014 violation. Applicant expressly denied 
any other security violations within the previous seven years.7 
 
 The OPM investigator then confronted Applicant about his April 2014 security 
violation. He admitted that he had received a written reprimand for the violation and had 
been required to complete remedial security training. He claimed that he had initially 
denied any other security violation because he had forgotten about the April 2014 
violation, even during the discussion of the November 2014 violation. He also claimed 
that his employment with the DOD contractor was so unpleasant that he had tried to forget 
it. 8  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 36-41, 57. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 GE 2; Tr. 27, 69. 
 
 
4 
 
 When confronted by the OPM investigator about his failure to disclose his PIP on 
his SCA or during his security interview, Applicant claimed that he had not believed that 
the PIP had fallen within the scope of the SCA queries. He further claimed that he tried 
not to remember his unpleasant experience at the DOD contractor, as discussed above.9 
 
 Applicant provided multiple, conflicting explanations for his omissions on his SCA 
and during the security interview. Applicant testified that he did not disclose the two 
security violations on his SCA because he misinterpreted the questions as querying 
whether his security clearance had been suspended or revoked. He further claimed that 
he had not listed his two written reprimands because he misunderstood the question and 
had not listed the PIP because he disputed its merits. He believed that he did not have 
an adequate opportunity on the SCA to fully explain the circumstances of the PIP, written 
reprimands, and security violations. He both claimed that he had rushed to fill out the SCA 
but also that he felt it was complete. He explained that at the time he completed the SCA, 
he was homeless, working temporary jobs, and eager to find gainful employment. I did 
not find Applicant’s explanations credible, because they conflicted with the documentary 
evidence and with each other.10 
  
 Applicant’s work performance was well regarded by a previous employer.11 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
9 GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. 43-45, 57, 66. 
 
11 Answer. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information – which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information – raises 
doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 34. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant committed security violations in April 2014 and November 2014, despite 
initial security training and then remedial security training following the April 2014 security 
violation. Applicant had received a written reprimand following the April 2014 security 
violation and was on a PIP at the time of the November 2014 security violation. 
Nonetheless, he emailed materials that included confidential information with 
 
6 
 
classifications markings without reading the document himself. AG ¶¶ 34(g) and 34(h) 
apply. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the use of handling protected information concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and  
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
“Once it is established that an applicant has committed security violations, he or 
she has a ‘very heavy burden’ to surmount in mitigating the concerns arising therefrom, 
insofar as security violations ‘strike at the heart of the Industrial Security Program.’”12 The 
extent to which an applicant was placed on notice of the security requirements of his job 
and to which he received adverse actions regarding infractions is also relevant in 
evaluating the seriousness of the applicant’s conduct.13   
 
 Applicant’s two security violations occurred in 2014, and there is no record 
evidence that he handled sensitive information after his January 2015 resignation. 
Although Applicant contends that he has learned from his security violations, Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment are undercut by his failure to disclose 
the security violations on the SCA and during his security interview. Therefore, AG ¶ 35(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant committed a second security violation while he was on a PIP and within 
months of his first violation and reprimand. Applicant remained at the DOD contractor for 
less than two months after the second security violation. Therefore, I cannot conclude 
that he has responded favorably to the second reprimand and remedial training. AG ¶ 
35(b) does not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s security violations resulted from improper 
training. Applicant’s violations were inadvertent; however, Applicant repeatedly failed to 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 11-09219 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 2014)(quoting ISCR Case No. 10-07070 at 8-9 (App. 
Bd. April 19, 2012)). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 11-09219 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 2014). 
 
7 
 
disclose his security violations and reprimands when required on his SCA and during his 
interview. When specifically questioned whether he had committed any other security 
violations – after having discussed the November 2014 violation – Applicant denied any 
other violations. Furthermore, the November 2014 data spillage was considered a loss by 
DSS. AG ¶¶ 35(c) and (d) do not apply. Applicant did not surmount the “very heavy 
burden” necessary to mitigate the security concerns arising from his security violations. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct security concern is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 The guidelines notes two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that potentially 
apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status,  determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 On his June 2016 SCA and during his August 2017 security interview, Applicant 
omitted his PIP, two written reprimands, and two security violations, until confronted by 
the OPM investigator. I found Applicant’s explanations for his omissions to be not 
credible, because they conflicted with the record evidence and with each other. I did not 
find it plausible that Applicant interpreted Section 13C to exclude his written reprimands, 
when the plain language of the question seeks written reprimands. Similarly, it is not 
plausible that Applicant would remember one security violation but not another violation 
that occurred only a few months earlier. This conclusion is buttressed by Applicant’s 
admission that he was unemployed at the time and was concerned about disclosing the 
reprimands and PIP. Applicant listed Supervisor #1, who only supervised Applicant for a 
few weeks, instead of his long-term supervisor, Supervisor #2, due to his concerns about 
receiving a bad reference. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the established personal conduct security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
During his August 2017 security interview, Applicant did not disclose his PIP, two 
written reprimands, or two security violations until confronted by the OPM investigator. 
Applicant’s falsifications raise significant security concerns. Applicant is unable to 
adequately explain his omissions, and he continues to deny all falsifications. AG ¶¶ 17(a) 
and (c) do not apply. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns associated with the falsifications on his SCA and during his security interview.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines K and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s work performance is well regarded by his former employer; however, 
Applicant’s security violations and falsifications raise significant security concerns. 
Applicant’s disagreement with the merits of the security violations, reprimands, or PIP do 
not justify his deliberate omission of this information during the industrial security 
investigation. Applicant continues to deny any deliberate omissions or falsifications. I 
 
9 
 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the handling protected information and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
