KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: A variance between allegation and proof is material only when the extent of the
variance is so great that the allegation fails to serve as reasonable notice to the applicant of the
concerns raised, thereby subjecting him or her to unfair surprise when confronted with the
Government’s evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02595.a1
DATE: 07/31/2018
DATE: July 31, 2018
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02595
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alison R. Wills, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 10, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On March 30, 2018, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Caroline E. Heintzelman
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant, who holds a bachelor’s degree, has worked as a Federal contractor since 2003. 
She was previously granted access to classified information in 2003 and 2008.  Applicant failed to
pay Federal taxes for tax years 2007 and for 2009 through 2011.  She claimed that her tax problems
were the result of part-time employment as a 1099 contractor, inconsistent income, and her having
been charged twice by the IRS for withdrawals from her 401(k) plan.  Although the SOR alleged
that Applicant owed nearly $40,000 to the IRS, the Judge found that, by the close of the record, this
liability was about $27,000.  Applicant provided documentation that she has a payment plan with
the IRS, with $607 due at the end of October 2017.  This document states that her last monthly
payment was $0.  Moreover, it is not clear which tax years are covered in this payment plan.1 
Applicant’s SOR also alleges several delinquent medical debts, which Applicant denied because
they should have been submitted to her insurance company.  Despite these denials, Applicant
entered into payment plans for some of her debts.  She disputed one of them because she could not
locate it and because it did not appear on her credit report.  In completing her security clearance
application (SCA), Applicant disclosed her tax problems for 2007.  She did not disclose
delinquencies for other years.  In her answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that she was not aware
of her tax issues because she relied on a certified public accountant to file for her.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant’s financial problems, including her tax liabilities, were
recent and recurrent.  She stated that Applicant did not demonstrate responsible action in regard to
her debts and that she had provided insufficient evidence of timely and consistent payment.  The
Judge also stated that, despite her dispute of certain debts, Applicant did not offer documentary
corroboration.  Concerning Guideline E, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s experience with the
clearance process, her education, and the insufficiency of her explanations demonstrated that her
omissions from the SCA were deliberate.  She concluded that the evidence raised serious doubts
about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.
1The SOR also alleged that Applicant failed to file her tax returns in a timely fashion for 2015 and 2016.  The
Judge resolved this allegation in Applicant’s favor.  
2
Discussion
Applicant argues that the SOR misstated the true amount of her debt to the IRS.  She
contends that, at the time the SOR was issued, her debt had been reduced significantly from what
was stated in the allegation.  She further argues that the Government failed to present evidence of
the security concern raised by Applicant’s tax liabilities.
We agree with Applicant that there is a variance between the SOR allegation as it is written
and evidence that her tax debt was substantially less as of the close of the record.  The Judge’s
finding about the extent of Applicant’s tax indebtedness is supported by “such relevant evidence as
a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  A variance between allegation and proof is
material only when the extent of the variance is so great that the allegation fails to serve as
reasonable notice to the applicant of the concerns raised, thereby subjecting him or her to unfair
surprise when confronted with the Government’s evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08255 at
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 22, 2017).  In the case before us, we find no reason to believe that Applicant was
denied adequate notice of the concerns raised by her indebtedness.  That the SOR  alleged a greater
tax debt than the record evidence subsequently established did not preclude Applicant from
presenting a meaningful case for mitigation.  
 On the question of whether the Government met its burden of production, we note that the
Directive presumes that there is a nexus between admitted or proved facts under any of the
Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 16-01900 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2018).  In the case before us, the record, which includes IRS
tax transcripts and Applicant’s answer to the SOR, shows that Applicant failed to pay her full tax
obligation for several years and that she also had delinquent medical debts.  The evidence, viewed
as a whole, is sufficient to raise concerns under Guideline F that Applicant may be lacking in
judgment and reliability.  We resolve this issue adversely to Applicant.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that her omissions were deliberate.  However, the
Judge reasonably explained the basis for her finding, evidence that the IRS sent notices, that
Applicant had outstanding tax obligations, along with evidence of her education and business
experience.2  As with the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s tax debt, her finding that Applicant’s
omissions were deliberate is established under the standard set forth in the Directive.
  
The remainder of Applicant’s brief consists of a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence and to her contention that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence, for example her
evidence of debt reduction and her claim that she was not aware of the extent of her indebtedness. 
2For 2009, 2010, and 2011, Applcant’s IRS transcripts reflect that the IRS sent notices on several occasions
before she submitted her SCA.  On some of those occasions, the transcripts reflect activity by Applicant shortly after
the notices were sent, suggesting she was responding to the notices.  However, the transcripts also show other examples
where the IRS sent notices and no activity appears to have been taken in response to said notices.  Item 2 of Department
Counsel’s File of Relevant Material.
3
In presenting her arguments, Applicant includes evidence from outside the record, which we cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record, nor has she shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01077 at 3 (App. Bd.
Apr. 25, 2018).  An ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not enough to
show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.            
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
5
