 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03736  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
July 25, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.  The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 9, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on April 24, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on May 2, 2018, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 14, 2018.  The Government offered 
four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  Applicant testified 
on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on June 28, 2018 
to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  Applicant 
 
2 
 
submitted two Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A 
and B, which were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on June 22, 2018. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the country of Belarus.  Department Counsel provided a six page summary of the facts, 
supported by eight Government documents pertaining to Belarus, identified as 
Government Exhibit 4.  The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary.  Applicant had no objection.  I took administrative notice of the facts included 
in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 49 years old and divorced.  He has a bachelor’s degree in Computer 
Science, and is currently applying for a positon as a Linquist.  A security clearance is 
required in connection with his employment with a defense contractor.    
  
 Applicant was born in Minsk, Belarus in September 1968.  He attended the 
university in Belarus, and completed two years of his mandatory military service in the 
Soviet Union.  In 1991, he sought refugee status to the United States when his ex-wife 
and her parents were being persecuted for being Jewish while living in Belarus.  In 
1992, their refugee status was approved, and at the age of 24, he first arrived in the 
United States in September 1992, as a Belarussian refugee.  In September 1993, 
Applicant received his permanent resident card, and he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in July 1999.  Applicant testified that he is actively seeking a security clearance 
for a job that is no longer available.      
 
 Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens and residents of Belarus.  Applicant 
maintains contact with his mother in Belarus about once a month, and with his brother a 
couple of times a year.  Before his mother retired, she worked at a company that made 
vehicles to repair construction equipment.  She now supports herself with something 
similar to social security she receives from Belarus.  In the past, Applicant has provided 
his mother with financial support to supplement her income.  He testified that he has 
given her a total of approximately $7,000 over the years.  (Tr. p. 28.)  He last sent her 
money in 2012, which was the last time he physically saw her.  Applicant’s younger 
brother is an engineer who works for a private company.  On occasion, Applicant has 
given his brother $100 or so on family visits.  Both Applicant’s mother and brother reside 
in the same apartment, owned by Applicant’s mother.  (Tr. p. 31.)  Applicant’s father 
 
3 
 
died in 2006.  Prior to his death, he worked as an Electrical Engineer for a private 
company.       
 
 Applicant has an ex-girlfriend, he met online on an international website in 2013, 
who is a citizen and resident of Russia.  At the time he met her, he believed she lived in 
Sweden, and he had no idea that she worked for the Russian government.  (Tr. p. 33.)  
He later learned that she was employed with the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  
From 2013 to 2016, Applicant spoke with her many times, but only physically saw her 
twice when she came to the United States.  On those two occasions, she stayed with 
the Applicant for at least 30 days at a time at his home.  (Tr. p. 34.)  Applicant states 
that he recently learned that she quit her job, and that she now works in the private 
sector.  He currently maintains contact with her several times a year.  (Tr. p. 39.)  
Several weeks before the hearing, she posted some pictures on facebook and Applicant 
initiated contact with her to start up small talk.  (Tr. pp. 39 - 40.)  He believes that she 
currently lives in Moscow.  Applicant states that she has never probed him for 
information.    
 
 Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s former boss with whom he worked 
as a tax preparer, and from a role player manager for a training support marines 
contract attest to Applicant’s high level of efficiency, diligence, care and concern, 
timeliness and completeness.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  
 
 I have taken administrative notice concerning the country of Belarus.  Belarus is 
an authoritarian state.  Since his election as president in 1994, Aliaksandr Lukashenka 
has consolidated his rule over all institutions and undermined the rule of law through  
authoritarian means, including manipulated elections and arbitrary decrees.  There are 
significant human rights problems that include abuses by the security forces, authorities 
arbitrarily arrest detain and imprison citizens for criticizing officials, participating in 
demonstrations or other political reasons.  There is judiciary political interference and 
lack of independence; government restricted civil liberties, including freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, association and religion.  Official corruption in all branches of 
government remain a problem.  There is violence and discrimination against women;  
Trafficking in persons; state sponsored labor forces; and cyber crime is prevalent.  The 
government of Belarus continues to detain and fine religious leaders for engaging in 
unregistered religious activities.  
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
 
5 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members include his mother and brother, who are 
citizens and residents of Belarus.  Based upon the evidence presented, they do not 
threaten or influence Applicant’s choice of interest as a naturalized United States 
citizen.  Applicant’s contact with them is casual, minimal and not out of the ordinary.  
They have no interest in or knowledge of Applicant’s security clearance or work product.  
On the other hand, Applicant’s contact with his past on-line girlfriend raises some 
serious concerns.  Applicant met this woman on-line.  He established a relationship with 
her, and she came to visit him on two separate occasions in the Unites States, where 
she stayed at his home, each time for at least a 30-day period.  Applicant states that he 
did not know that she worked for the Russian government until sometime later. Under 
the particular circumstances here, the risk-benefit analysis is applicable, and this 
contact poses a security risk to the U.S. government that is not necessary.  There is 
nothing here that may manipulate or induce the Applicant to help a foreign person or 
government in a way that is inconsistent with the U.S. interests.  Applicant has  
subjected himself to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest from his connection with this woman.  The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
6 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 The nature of the relationships with his family do not pose a security risk.  There 
is no conflict of interest.  No one in his family is associated with the Belarus 
government, nor do they show any interest in the Applicant or his work.  Applicant is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and his relationship with his family does not result in a divided 
allegiance.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has been established in 
regard to his family members.  The same is not true for his ex-girlfriend who is a foreign 
national.  No mitigation is applicable.  The relationship poses a heightened security risk 
particularly relevant to this proceeding.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
7 
 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s familial Belaurus connections do not pose a risk to the U.S. 
government.  However, his strange, unique, and unusual contact with his ex-girlfriend, a 
foreign national, about whom he has limited information, does create an unnecessary 
security risk not worth any benefit to the U.S. government.      
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINT APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
