 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01779  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew W. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
July 10, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was originally assigned to another administrative 
judge on September 13, 2017.  It was transferred to the undersigned administrative 
judge on May 21, 2018.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of 
hearing on May 2, 2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 31, 2018. 
The Government offered two exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  
 
2 
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on June 8, 2018. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old.  He is married and has one child.  He holds a 
bachelor’s degree, and has completed some credits in graduate school.  He holds the 
position of Performance Engineer for a defense contractor.  A security clearance is 
needed in connection with his employment.  
  
 Applicant was born in the United States. He attended an American university and 
obtained his bachelor’s degree here in 2002.  He received additional course work, and 
was then employed with his current employer in 2006, where he worked in the United 
States.  In 2009, Applicant was transferred by the same company to work in Japan.  (Tr. 
p. 21.)  Applicant met his wife, a Japanese national, in April 2010 and they were married 
in the spring of 2012 in the United States.  They have a one year old son. 
 
 Since 2009, Applicant has worked and resided in Japan.  He is legally employed 
in Japan under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) visa issued by the United States 
and recognized by the Japanese government.  It allows him access around the country 
of Japan and the ability to stay, but he is precluded from working for a non-U.S. 
Government job.  He is also not entitled to any of the Japanese government benefits 
provided its citizens such as welfare and insurance.       
 
 Applicant co-owns a Japanese Card Shop he invested in with an approximate 
value of $25,000.  He explained that he purchased a 5 percent share of the company, 
and has recently been asked if he would like to sell his shares.  Applicant also has one 
Japanese bank account that has never held a balance above $1,000.  Applicant’s 
income from his employer goes into two United States banks.   
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen and resident of Japan.  She owns a small company 
she started that provides coaching and seminar training.  It is a registered single owner 
business under Japanese law.  The business is doing well and is growing dramatically.  
Its current value is worth approximately $500,000.  Applicant’s spouse also owns three 
apartments in Japan with an approximate value of $45,000.  She has several loans 
against the properties.  She also pays Japanese taxes and receives the benefits offered 
to Japanese nationals.  Applicant’s son is a dual citizen of the United States and Japan, 
since he was born in Japan and his father is a United States citizen.   
 
 Applicant and his wife have chosen to keep their finances entirely separate.  
They do not share bank accounts.  Applicant’s wife has four active Japanese bank 
accounts, consisting of two personal bank accounts and two corporate accounts.  As of 
 
3 
 
the date of the hearing she has approximately $780,000 in her corporate accounts.  (Tr. 
p. 28.)  Applicant’s wife also has a number of aunts and uncles in Japan, but she does 
not hear from them aside from the birth of her baby or during her wedding.  Applicant 
has never met them.    
   
 Applicant’s father-in-law is also a citizen and resident of Japan.  He is now 
retired.  Applicant’s only contact with him is when he visits once every four months or so 
to see his grandson.  He does not speak good English and Applicant has very little 
dialog with him.  (Tr. p. 30.) Applicant does not speak conversational Japanese but is 
able to get by.  He does not have any Japanese friends, as he has trouble discussing 
things beyond the basics.  (Tr. 32.) 
 
 Since moving to Japan for work with his company, Applicant has regularly 
traveled back to the United States on average about two to three times a year.  (Tr. p. 
37.)  Applicant also maintains a 401(k) retirement account with an American finance 
company which contains about $500,000.  He also holds a long term-American 
managed investment account that now stands at about $300,000.  (Tr. p. 39.)  
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
4 
 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 
5 
 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or  exploitation or 
personal conflict of interests. 
 
  Applicant’s roots are in the United States.  He was born here, grew up here, and 
went to college here.  He also started his working career in the United States.  Although 
he now lives and works in Japan, he does so only in order to continue his employment 
with an American contractor who transferred him there.  Applicant is still deeply 
engrained in the American culture.  Admittedly, he has lived in Japan, an ally of the 
United States, for the past nine years.  He has married a Japanese foreign national, and 
they have a child together, who is a dual citizen.   
 
          Applicant’s foreign contacts, which include his spouse and his father-in-law, do 
not pose a threat to Applicant’s security worthiness.  Applicant has minimal contact with 
his father-in-law, who is retired and is not affiliated with the Japanese government.  It is 
recognized that Applicant’s wife is a successful Japanese business woman who has 
almost $2 million dollars in business interests in Japan.  However, similarly, Applicant is 
a successful engineer for a United States government contractor in Japan. Applicant 
also has significant financial assets in the United States, totaling almost $1 million 
dollars.  Balancing these conflicting interests, Applicant’s contacts in Japan do not 
threaten or influence him to have a divided allegiance.  His job is most important to him, 
as he and his wife do not comingle their income.  Since 2009, Applicant is restricted by 
the laws in Japan to working only for the United States government.  He does not have 
the freedoms of Japanese citizens.  Furthermore, because of the language barrier, 
Applicant does not have Japanese friends, for the most part.  Applicant stated that at 
any given time he can easily move his family to the United States.  He explained that 
given the nature of his wife’s business, she can easily operate her business in Japan 
from the United States, and that they have considered that an option.  Applicant’s small 
investment in the Japanese card company is not something he plans to continue to 
keep.  In fact, to avoid further problems with his clearance, he is discussing the idea of 
selling his interest in this investment.  Accordingly, Applicant is not subjected to a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of interest from 
his connection to his family Japan or from his financial interests in Japan.  However, the 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could 
not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Again, the nature of the Applicant’s relationships with his spouse, and his father-
in-law in Japan do not pose a security risk.  There is no conflict of interest.  No one in 
his wife’s family is associated with the Japanese government, nor do they show any 
interest in the Applicant or his work.  Applicant is a United States citizen and his 
relationship with his family does not result in a divided allegiance.  There is nothing here 
that may manipulate or induce the Applicant to help a foreign person or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with the U.S. interests.  Based upon this history, Applicant will 
always resolve any situation in favor of the United States.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 
8(a), 8(b), and 8(f), has been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has no history of misconduct or security violations.  His Japanese 
connections do not pose a risk to the U.S. government.  Applicant obviously has the 
level of judgment required to access classified information as evidenced by his 
longstanding commitment to our country.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
