 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02373 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
   For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline C (foreign 
preference) and Guideline B (foreign influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (foreign 
preference) and Guideline B (foreign influence).1 In a letter dated November 10, 2017, 
Applicant answered the allegations and requested a determination based on the written 
record. On November 30, 2017, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
(FORM) with three attachments (“Items”).2 Applicant timely responded to the FORM 
with two letters, which were incorporated into the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on May 23, 2018.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44 year old who has worked as a mail handler for the past two-
and-a-half years. She was granted an interim security clearance in February 2016. Her 
past employment has included work in retail sales and customer service. Applicant has 
earned two associate’s degrees. She is married and has two children and one stepchild.  
 
 Born in the Argentine Republic (Argentina), Applicant came to this country at 
some time before 2005 and sought United States citizenship. She returned to Argentina 
from late 2008 through early 2011, however, to live with her children during a period of 
unemployment.3 In the interim, in 2009, she became a naturalized United States citizen. 
She considers herself to be a dual citizen of the United States and Argentina. When she 
completed a security clearance application (SCA) in January 2016, she noted that she 
held an Argentine passport, which was issued in 2003 and expired in 2013, which she 
only used when visiting Argentina. It appears the passport was renewed and used in 
2014 on a European trip. (FORM, Item 3, at 2)  
 
In her subject interview, Applicant stated that she has access to free educational 
and medical benefits in Argentina, but she does not use them. (FORM, Item 3, at 1). In 
that same interview, she stated that she “has no obligations or citizenship requirements 
to fill related to her foreign citizenship.” (FORM, Item 3, at 1) She has not voted in an 
Argentine election since becoming a United States citizen and she has no current plans 
to do so. Applicant has no personal financial interests or holdings in Argentina. She 
maintains her Argentine citizenship because “she loves the U.S. which is her home, but 
loves Argentina which is her country.” (FORM, Item 3, at 2) Eventually, after she has 
retired, she plans to split time between the two countries.  
 
Applicant’s parents are deceased, but she has a brother, a citizen and resident of 
Argentina, who is a police officer in Argentina. She maintains regular contact with him 
by telephone. Her stepson, the son of her U.S.-born husband, was raised in Argentina, 
                                                          
2 There was no request for administrative notice regarding the foreign country at issue. It is noted, 
however, that Argentina has grown and stabilized since the days of the Perón regime. Today, Argentina 
has the second largest economy in South America, the third largest in Latin America and is a member of 
the G-15 and G-20 major economies. It is also a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, 
World Trade Organization, Union of South American Nations, and Community of Latin American and 
Caribbean States. It is the country with the second highest Human Development Index in Latin America 
with a rating of “very high.”  Its military is designed to insure self-defense of the country, and to assist in 
multinational endeavors. Argentina was the only South American country to send warships and cargo 
planes in 1991 to the Gulf War under UN mandate and has remained involved in peacekeeping efforts in 
multiple locations. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argentina. 
 
3 In discussing her return to Argentina during this period, Applicant noted that she later returned “home.” 
(United States). (SOR Response) 
 
 
 
 
3 
the place of his birth.  He is a citizen of Argentina. He is or was living with Applicant and 
her husband.4 He arrived in their care some time at the end of 2014. (FORM, Item 2, at 
30 of 59) The stepchild’s visa expired in October 2015. An attorney’s help was obtained 
for finalizing the stepchild’s residency status within the United States.5 As of December 
2016, he was awaiting receipt of his residency papers so he could start college in the 
United States. (FORM, Item 3, at 6) Applicant also has a friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Argentina. This friend currently works in an Argentine revenue division. 
Applicant and this friend maintain regular contact. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All reliable information about the 
person must be considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An a applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision is on an applicant.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard protected information.  
                                                          
4 In her December 2016 interview, Applicant stated he was staying with her family in preparation of 
college. (FORM, Item 3, at 6) 
 
5 Given that the stepchild already lives in the United States, it is unclear whether Applicant’s use of 
“residency” implies a pursuit of citizenship. 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is stated at AG 9:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship.  
 
 The Government bases its intent to revoke Applicant’s security clearance on her 
stated reluctance to relinquish her foreign citizenship, because she spent time in 
Argentina after becoming a United States citizen, and because she may split time 
between the United States and Argentine after retirement. Applicant was born and 
raised in Argentina, hence her claim to Argentine citizenship. There is no indication she 
might retire soon (she is still in her 40s), that she soon plans to return to Argentina, or 
that she has begun making financial preparations in Argentina so she could execute 
such a plan. Affection for one’s birthplace is not the same as exhibiting a foreign 
preference. At best, the circumstances presented comprise a future interest in Argentina 
that may or may not come to fruition.  
 
 Additionally, there is no current bar to retaining foreign citizenship absent a 
conflict or some motive to do so that might pose a security risk. Neither situation is 
present here. Moreover, the renewal of a foreign passport is no longer a disqualifying 
condition under this guideline. Furthermore, she has no financial interests in Argentina. I 
conclude the record evidence as a whole does not establish a prima facie case for 
disqualification under Guideline C in its current form.  
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence  
 
 Under the AG, foreign contact and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U. S. interests or 
otherwise be made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Assessment of foreign contact and interests should consider the country in which the 
foreign contact or interest is included.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 The AG lists nine available disqualifying conditions. Here, given that Applicant 
has two contacts who are citizens and residents of Argentina: a brother who is a police 
officer and a friend who works for the Argentine government in a white collar position. In 
addition, the stepson who lives with her had an expired visa in about October 2015. I 
find the following potentially apply:  
 
¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country, if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
Under ¶ 8, the mitigating condition set forth at ¶ 8(a) is clearly applicable: 
  
¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States. 
 
 At the onset, I note that Applicant’s stepson, with the aid of retained legal 
counsel, is in the process of finalizing the needed paperwork to obtain U.S. residency. 
During this process, he has resided in the United States with his father and Applicant, 
both U.S. citizens. He has posed no heightened risk of foreign exploitation or 
manipulation. Also, with his plans to continue living in the United States and attend 
college in the U.S., his Argentine citizenship does not raise serious security concerns. 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Argentina, where he works as a 
police officer. Given the status and stability of Argentina today, Applicant’s relationship 
with her brother similarly poses little security concern. The same can be said of her 
friend, who works in a civil service position for the Argentine government. It is highly 
unlikely that either of these Argentine connections would be placed in a position where 
Applicant would have to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B and C, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). A fair and commonsense 
assessment of all available information bearing on Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information supports a conclusion in favor of the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
