 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03689 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 27, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on March 23, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant submitted a timely response and 
his exhibits are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G. There were no 
objections by Applicant or Department Counsel and all Items and exhibits are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations in ¶ 1.a through 1.m and denied the 
allegation in ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 82 years old. He was born in Iraq, moved to the United Kingdom in 
about 1978 and then to Canada in 1982. He moved to the United States in 1994 and was 
naturalized in 1999.1  
 
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in Iraq in 1958. He married in 1968 and has 
three grown children. He worked for the United States Government from 2005 to 2011. 
From 2011 to the present, he has been employed at a consulting company that has 
federal contracts. He has also been employed by a federal contractor since May 2017.2  
 
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from May 2017 and December 2017 
corroborate the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.3 Applicant attributed his financial 
problems to insufficient income. His debts began becoming delinquent in approximately 
2014. The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts that include numerous credit cards and 
consumer accounts totaling approximately $71,243.4  
 
During Applicant’s May 2017 counterintelligence interview, he told the investigator 
that his personal finances were “not bad.”5 He was getting assistance from his son 
because he did not receive enough income from his Social Security benefits. His son 
gives him about $1,000 a month. He explained he did not have enough money to pay his 
debts. He had hired a debt consolidation company to assist him in negotiating settlement 
agreements with his creditors. Applicant did not disclose any of his delinquent debts in 
his security clearance application (SCA) because he believed he did not have to because 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
he was engaged in negotiations to establish payment plans through the debt 
consolidation company.6 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he indicated that through his attorney he was 
negotiating monthly installment payments to settle each debt. For the delinquent debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,886) he provided a copy of a check from December 2107 for 
$29; for the debt in ¶ 1.d ($1,609) a copy of a check was provided for $50 from December 
2017; and for the debt in ¶ 1.m ($7,047) a copy of a check was provided for $145 from 
November 2017.7 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provided an April 2018 letter from his 
attorney confirming there are payment plans for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.m. 
No documents were provided to show Applicant has made additional payments beyond 
the initial payments noted above.8 Documents provided show that Applicant was offered 
settlement agreements for the following debts: SOR ¶ 1.a (current balance owed $11,464-
settlement offer $4,012, expired February 15, 2018); ¶ 1.k (balance is $1,203-settlement 
offer $421 or monthly payments of $70); ¶ 1.f ($9,226-settlement offer $4,152 or monthly 
payments of $173); and ¶ 1.h (balance $9,729-settlement offer $4,378 or monthly 
payments of $182). Applicant did not provide documents to prove that he has accepted  
the settlement offers and made payments toward resolution of the those debts, or on any 
of the other debts, except as previously noted. No information was provided regarding the 
remaining debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant did not provide information about his 
current finances or budget.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
                                                          
6 Item 6. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c have the same collection company. Applicant’s answer to the SOR 
stated he is making payments on SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
9 AE B, C, D, E, F, G. 
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
 
5 
 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has 13 unresolved delinquent debts totaling more than $70,000, which 
he is unable or unwilling to pay. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s history of not meeting his financial obligations began in 2014. He 
attributed his financial problems to limited income. After completing his SCA, he made 
some effort to address three of his delinquent debts, but it was minimal. He provided proof 
of one payment to three creditors. He also provided documents to show he has been 
offered settlement agreements by some creditors, but did not show he has acted upon 
the offers or made any payments. He has not provided evidence of his current finances, 
 
6 
 
 
and his ability to make the settlement payments. Without additional information, I am 
unable to conclude his financial problems were beyond his control. There is no 
documentation to substantiate his participation in the settlement agreements or proof that 
he made consistent payments to the three creditors. Thus, I cannot find he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his 
behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure to pay his financial obligations casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do 
not apply. 
  
 Applicant stated that he had engaged a debt consolidation company and later an 
attorney to help him resolve his financial problems. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude there are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or 
under control because he did not provide evidence he has followed through on payments 
to his creditors. Although he made a payment to three creditors and has settlement offers 
from others, the evidence does not support a finding that he is adhering, in good faith, to 
efforts to repay overdue creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant stated that he did not disclose delinquent debts on his SCA because he 
believed he did not have to because he was engaged in negotiations to establish payment 
plans through a debt consolidation company. I find there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his past debts, but rather believed 
he was not obligated because he was addressing them. I find AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply. 
I find for Applicant under this guideline. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 82 years old. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show he has 
been making payments on his delinquent debts or is participating in settlement 
agreements. Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. He refuted the Guideline E, 
personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
