 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04203 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barret Thomas Alexander, Personal Representative 
 
 
July 10, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 18, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on April 17, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 8, 2018. The Government offered 
six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. The Applicant offered nine exhibits at the hearing, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through I.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 16, 2018 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 29 years old.  He is unmarried with no children.  He has a Bachelor’s 
Degree of Science in Environmental Engineering.  He is employed by a defense 
contractor as an Environmental Health and Safety Engineer.  He is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified eleven debts under this guideline, eight out of the eleven are 
delinquent student loans totaling approximately $67,000, and other miscellaneous debt 
of $10,000, for a total of approximately $76,000.  In his answer, Applicant admitted 
allegations 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.h., and 1.i.  He denied the remaining allegations.  Applicant 
began working for his current employer in February 2017, and has been trying to 
remedy his financial indebtedness.   
 
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated April 29, 2017; November 8, 2017; 
February 27, 2018; and May 7, 2018, confirm each of the debts listed in the SOR.  
(Government Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and 6.)  From 2011 through 2015, Applicant attended a 
university to obtain a degree in engineering.  Following his graduation in 2015, he 
experienced difficulty paying his student loans and other debts.  He explained that at the 
time, he was taking care of his handicapped younger brother who suffers from Type-1 
Bipolar Disorder, which involved dramatic mood swings and depression, and suicidal 
tendency.  Applicant was his brother’s primary care-giver and did not receive parental 
support of any sort.  Applicant’s mother left the family to pursue a new marriage while 
his father remained relatively absent from his life.  Applicant was left with the financial 
responsibility of taking care of his younger brother, while also trying to finish college.  
Applicant explained that he was financially destitute when he graduated from college.  
During his last semester in college, he lived in six different houses with friends and did 
what is called “couch surfing,” as he did not have enough money for his living situation 
or to take care of his brother.  (Tr. p. 39.)  Applicant stated that he worked part time and 
odd jobs to pay for essentials, such as food and rent, but it was not enough without 
dropping his class schedule all together, so he pursued financial aid from several 
education lenders, and accrued large debt.        
 
Applicant testified that he currently has 12 outstanding student loans comprised 
of eight standard, unsubsidized and subsided loans with the Department of Education.  
 
3 
 
(Applicant’s Exhibits A, B and C.)  These student loans are set forth in allegations 1.b., 
1.c., 1.d., and 1.h., totaling approximately $32,000.  Applicant is also indebted for four 
ECMC student loans, which are loans granted through a Special Appeal Board under 
extraordinary circumstances.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D and E.)  These student loans are 
set forth in allegations 1.a., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g., totaling approximately $33,000.  
Applicant testified that he has completed the rehabilitation program with regard to the 
ECMC student loans, and is in the process of re-establishing a payment plan.  
Applicant’s 2017 tax return, in the amount of $1,015, went toward a payment for this 
loan.  He believes that he now owes at total of about $32,000 for the four ECNC student 
loans.  His eight student loans with the Department of Education are currently in the 
rehabilitation program, which is set to be completed in September of this year.  He 
testified that he has made one payment of $2,000 toward this debt of about $33,000. 
Once the rehabilitation program is completed, Applicant intends to ask the Department 
of Education to consolidate what he owes on all of his student loans loans to make the 
payment plan more affordable.  As of May 7, 2018, Applicant’s outstanding principal in 
total student loans is $67,553.  His total outstanding interest is $8,455.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit A.)  He hopes to obtain an income-based repayment plan.  (Tr. p. 41.) 
 
1.i.  Applicant also owes a bank for a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of 
$4,478.  Applicant explained that he was using this credit card to pay living expenses.  
The account has been closed and will no longer accrue interest.  The debt remains 
owing.  (Tr. p. 57.)   
 
1.j.  A debt to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the amount of 
$4,006 remains owing.   
 
1.k. A debt owed to an apartment management company was placed for 
collection in the amount of approximately $4,008.  Applicant settled the debt the day 
before the hearing, and it is no longer outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibits H and I.)   
  
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an e-QIP dated March 6, 2017.  Section 26 asked about his 
Financial Record, specifically, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts Other than 
Previously Listed.”  The question asked, “In the past 7 years, have you defaulted on any 
type of loan?”  It also asked, “In the past seven years have you had any account or 
credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?”  It further 
asked, “In the past seven years have you been over 120 days delinquent on any debt 
not previously entered?  Applicant responded, “NO,” to all three questions.  
(Government Exhibit 1.)  These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list any of the 
delinquent debts set forth in allegations 1. a., through 1. k., of the SOR.      
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation and claims that he misunderstood the questions.  
He states that he thought the questions were asking him if he has ever had a credit card 
forcibly close as a result of a delinquency.  Applicant further states that he has closed 
his accounts himself to avoid accruing interest, and he thought that if he closed his 
accounts himself, they could not become delinquent.  (Tr. pp. 45-57.)   
 
Applicant was confronted by the investigator about his delinquent debts, 
including his student loans, during his security clearance background investigation, and 
was asked how he intended to repay them.  Applicant told the investigator that he 
intended to use large sums of money from his Federal tax return and allocate the entire 
return to two different loan vendors.  (Tr. p. 47)  Applicant did not disclose these 
delinquent debts on his security clearance application.  He states that he did not realize 
that they were delinquent and that’s why he did not list them.  He states that he did not 
have a liaison or assistance in filling out the application.  I do not find this testimony 
credible.  Given the fact that the Applicant testified that he has been struggling 
financially for so long, he knew or should have known about his delinquent debts and he 
should have listed them in response to the questions of the security clearance 
application under Section 26.      
  
 Applicant’s year end performance review for 2017 is favorable.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit H.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s remains excessively indebted and is still working to get some of his 
student loans through the initial rehabilitation program before he can actually 
consolidate his loans and set up a payment plan to begin to resolve the debt.  He 
currently owes about $65,000 in student loan debt.  He also has several other debts that 
remain delinquent.  Given the circumstances, he has only resolved one debt listed in the 
SOR.  At this time, there is insufficient information in the record to conclude that he is 
now financially stable, that he can afford his lifestyle, or that he has the financial 
resources available to handle his financial obligations.  No monthly student loan 
payment has not been agreed upon, nor has he started to show that he can reasonably 
make the required payments.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  There were obviously circumstances beyond the Applicant’s control that 
contributed to his financial difficulties.  As the primary care giver for his younger brother, 
Applicant was unable to stay current with his student loans and other debt.   Applicant is 
commended for making this great sacrifice for his younger brother.  However, Applicant 
 
7 
 
has not yet started his monthly payments to resolve his delinquent debts, and they, for 
the most part, remain excessive and outstanding.  At this point, it cannot be said that he 
is financially stable or that he has made a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness. 
  
 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP in response to questions regarding his 
delinquent debts.  Applicant testified that he has struggled financially for years while 
trying to obtain his college degree, and after graduating, while caring for his younger 
brother.  This clearly shows that he knew about his delinquent debts.  Applicant is an 
educated and intelligent young man who was not honest with the Government.  He 
knew that the debts became delinquent, and he deliberately failed to disclose them in 
response to questions on the e-QIP.  The Government relies on one’s responses to the 
questions on the e-QIP to determine ones trustworthiness.  If the answers are not 
truthful, the Government is misled, and Applicant cannot be trusted.  Under the 
circumstances, Applicant knew or should have known about his financial indebtedness.  
There are no applicable conditions that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
