 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-01317 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He failed to timely file federal individual income tax 
returns for tax years 2011 through 2015. These matters are still outstanding, and 
although he may have good intentions, he has done little to rectify the situation. 
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on July 15, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on May 18, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2017. He admitted the sole allegation in 
the SOR, and he requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
He changed his mind in November 2017 and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2017. The hearing was scheduled 
to occur in January 2018, but did not due to a pending government shutdown. The 
hearing took place as rescheduled on April 18, 2018. Applicant appeared without 
counsel. Department Counsel offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as 
Exhibits 1-3. Applicant offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 
A-C. Applicant called one character witness and presented his own testimony. The 
record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. He made a timely 
submission of a letter of recommendation, which is admitted as Exhibit D. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on May 3, 2018. 
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance for the first time. He is employed as an engineering-production manager for a 
small company that manufactures a flight simulator for the Air National Guard and Air 
Force Reserve. He has never married and has no children. His formal education 
includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 1993, a master’s degree in 1998, and a 
master’s program during 2006-2008 without completing the thesis.  
 
Applicant attended the master’s program during 2006-2008 as part of changing 
his career field.2 He has since been continuously employed except for an 18-month 
period of unemployment from March 2010 to October 2011. He was then self-employed 
as a handy man and in property management. He obtained his current job in November 
2014. He now earns $45 hourly, and he earned about $90,000 in 2017.3 
 
Applicant does not dispute his history of tax problems. In his July 2016 security 
clearance application, he disclosed both failing to file federal tax returns and pay income 
tax, as required, for tax years 2011-2015.4 He provided additional information about his 
tax problems during a December 2016 interview during his background investigation.5 
He attributed his failure to unemployment and a fear that he would owe more than he 
could afford to pay. He stated that he intended on contacting and scheduling an 
                                                          
2 Tr. 59-62.  
 
3 Tr. 51-52.  
 
4 Exhibit 1.  
 
5 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
3 
 
appointment with a local IRS office to discuss his situation and obtain assistance with 
catching up on his federal tax obligations. 
 
At the hearing, Applicant again admitted his failure to file federal returns for tax 
years 2011-2015 and that his failure extended through 2016, although he filed his 2017 
federal return the day before the hearing.6 He does not know how much he owes the 
IRS in back taxes, penalties, and interest. Likewise, he disclosed that he had not filed 
state income tax returns for tax years 2011-2016, given their linkages to the federal 
returns. He does not know how much he owes the state tax authority in back taxes, 
penalties, and interest.7 He stated that he consulted with a couple of accountants and 
was advised to work with the IRS directly as their services would be cost prohibitive.8 
He explained his delay in addressing his tax problems was due to addressing more 
pressing financial issues (e.g., credit card debt with 16 percent interest).9 He has yet to 
meet in person with the IRS, although he has tried to contact them, and has not made 
arrangements with the IRS to file the returns and pay the amount owed.  
 
Applicant attributed his tax problems to his period of unemployment during 2010-
2011 and the subsequent period of self-employment where he was essentially 
underemployed. He further explained that he decided to not file returns because he 
knew he would be penalized for a premature withdrawal from a Roth IRA account and 
did not have the money to pay what he expected he would owe.10 For example, he 
received a gross distribution of $16,000 in 2012.11 He acknowledged that his decision 
was “ill conceived,” but he made the choice at the time to work on the worst debt first 
while trying to maintain mortgage loan payments on his home.12 For example, in April 
2015 he was still repaying a credit card account with a balance of $31,748 and a 
double-digit interest rate.13 
 
Applicant presented substantial evidence of his good character. The company 
president, chief executive officer, and owner of the company strongly vouched for 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. He sees no reason whatsoever to doubt 
Applicant’s trustworthiness. Applicant also presented a letter of recommendation from a 
close friend he has known since their college days together.14 It’s a thoughtful letter, 
                                                          
6 Tr. 45-47.  
 
7 Tr. 63.  
 
8 Tr. 47.  
 
9 Tr. 47-48; Exhibit C.  
 
10 Tr. 43-44.  
 
11 Exhibit B.  
 
12 Tr. 43.  
 
13 Exhibit C.  
 
14 Exhibit D.  
 
4 
 
and the friend wholeheartedly described Applicant as “a friend of the highest caliber” 
and recommended him without reservation.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.15 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.16 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”17 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.19 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.20 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.21 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.22 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.23 An 
                                                          
15 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
16 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
17 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
22 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.24 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.25 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .26 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income 
tax as required;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and   
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
                                                          
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
25 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
26 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of tax problems 
that is sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. That history is well 
established by his failure to file federal individual income tax returns for tax years 2011-
2015. In addition, the following matters were established during the hearing: (1) the 
failure to file extended through 2016; (2) he owes the IRS an unknown sum for back 
taxes, penalties, and interest; (3) he likewise failed to file state individual income tax 
returns for tax years 2011-2016; and (4) he owed the state tax authority an unknown 
sum for back taxes, penalties, and interest.27  
 
 In mitigation, I have considered the totality of the evidence, and it is simply not 
possible to mitigate Applicant’s conduct based on the record before me. To start, the 
mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply in Applicant’s favor because he is not 
in an arrangement with the IRS to file his past-due returns and pay what he owes in 
back taxes, penalties, and interest. He presented no documentation from the IRS 
concerning his situation, the matters are still outstanding, and he has done little to 
rectify the situation. The trend line here is not in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 In addition, I considered the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b), but it does not 
apply in Applicant’s favor. Without doubt, periods of unemployment and 
underemployment created a difficult financial situation. He is entitled to some leeway 
until tax year 2014, which is when he began his current employment and his overall 
financial situation began to stabilize. But several years have since passed and he has 
done little to resolve his tax problems with the IRS. In other words, he did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The failure to file tax returns or pay tax when due (or both) bears close 
examination and is a matter of serious concern to the federal government.28 The nexus 
or security significance between Applicant’s tax problems and his eligibility for access to 
classified information was explained by the Appeal Board as follows: 
 
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and a sense of [their] legal obligations. Failure to comply with 
federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem 
with abiding by well-established government rules and regulations. 
Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for protecting 
classified information.29  
 
                                                          
27 Because the additional matters were not alleged in the SOR, I did not consider them for disqualification 
purposes. But I did consider them for the limited purpose of considering the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of Applicant’s tax problems as well as the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of his tax 
problems.  
 
28 The General Accountability Office (GAO) expressed serious concern over the relationship between tax 
delinquents and clearance holders in its July 28, 2014 report, Security Clearances: Tax Debts Owed by 
DOD Employees and Contractors, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665052.pdf. 
 
29 ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) at 4 (citations omitted).  
 
7 
 
That is the situation here. Applicant did not voluntarily comply with his lawful obligation 
to file federal tax returns when due for multiple tax years. Indeed, he essentially did so 
intentionally, for the purpose of delaying paying what he owed to the IRS so he could 
address other financial obligations that he considered more pressing or important. This 
is a serious concern because his failure to comply with federal tax law may easily carry 
over into lapses in the serious business of properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information.  
 
 To sum up, it is far too soon to tell if Applicant will be able to make any 
meaningful progress in addressing his tax problems. His history of tax problems reflects 
a pattern of irresponsibility, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, I conclude that he did 
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
