 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03892 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 25, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On January 9, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 13, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after June 8, 
2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 26, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on May 2, 2018, and the 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on June 13, 2018. The Government offered eight 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and 
B, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record remained open until close of business on June 29, 2018, to allow the Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted one 
Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was 
admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 
22, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 60 years old and married a second time with two adult children and 
one adult step-child.  He has an Associate degree.  He is employed by a defense 
contractor as an Engineer.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection 
with his employment.  Applicant has been working for his current employer since 1981.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
The SOR identified eleven allegations concerning Applicant’s failure to file his 
Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2014, as well as his tax 
indebtedness.  The Government contends that Applicant’s Federal tax indebtedness 
totals approximately $70,000, and his state tax debt is approximately $18,000.  
Applicant admits all of the allegations pertaining to his tax indebtedness, and denies 
that he failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax year 2014.  Applicant states 
that he e-filed his 2014 Federal income taxes.  A letter dated June 26, 2018, from his 
tax preparer corroborates the fact that his state and Federal income tax returns for 2014 
were timely filed and acknowledged as received by both the IRS and state.   
        
 Applicant has been married to his current wife since May 2008.  Since he has 
been married, he has always hired a professional tax preparer to file his income tax 
returns.  He testified that in 2011 the government disputed his income tax return filing, 
(married filing jointly), and it has had a rippling effect over the next three years.  In 2014, 
Applicant received a notice from the IRS that his 2011 taxes were filed incorrectly.  
Applicant hired a new tax preparer to file amended tax returns for 2009, 2010, 2011, 
2012, and 2014.  The amended returns were filed, but were rejected by the IRS.  
Applicant is appealing this IRS decision, but does not know when the hearing on the 
matter is scheduled.  Applicant contends that his tax problems were caused by his wife 
not withholding sufficient Federal and state taxes, and the fact that she received a 
cancellation of debt in 2011, an IRS Form A 1099 – C, as well as a distribution from her 
retirement plan that she did not pay taxes on.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)     
 
3 
 
 Documentation from the IRS dated January 2018, indicates that Applicant was 
advised by the IRS that he owed significant monies in back taxes.  Specifically, that he 
owes the IRS for delinquent back taxes in the amount of $19,281 for tax year 2011.  He 
also became indebted to the IRS for delinquent back taxes in the amount of $30,253 for 
tax year 2012.  He also became indebted to the IRS for delinquent back taxes owed in 
the amount of $17,062 for tax year 2013.  He also became indebted to the IRS for 
delinquent back taxes owed in the amount of $4,240 for tax years 2015.  This debt 
remains outstanding.  Applicant has not yet set up a payment plan to resolve this debt.  
He believes that he owes a total of approximately $50,000 in Federal back taxes.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 In regard to state back taxes owed, Applicant owes $4,787 for tax year 2011.  He 
owes $2,367 for tax year 2012.  He owes $487 for tax year 2013, and he owes $47 for 
tax year 2015.  Applicant stated that since November 2016, his wages were garnished 
to pay the back taxes owed to the state.  At some point, the garnishment amount was 
as high as $575, but Applicant modified the amount to $250 per pay period which totals 
approximately $500 monthly.  (Tr. p. 38, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)      
 
 Applicant also provided a copy of a tax year computation showing payments that 
his wages were garnished from his payroll account beginning in July 2014 through 
January 2018 to pay his state taxes.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Applicant testified that his 
wife’s paycheck was also garnished in the amount of approximately $6,500.  (Tr. pp. 46-
47.)   
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
 
4 
 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is applicable in this case:   
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
  Applicant timely filed his income tax returns, and it is unclear why the IRS did not 
have record of his filing.  His history shows that he has filed most if not all of his income 
tax returns on time.  Tax liability was assessed against him due to the fact that his wife’s 
income tax withholdings were insufficient.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.   
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
  
  (g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
  Since 2014, Applicant has been working on a tax problem that surfaced in 2011.  
He has hired a tax preparer to repair his tax problems.  As of yet, the problem has not 
been resolved.  Amended returns were filed for tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015, 
but were rejected by the IRS.  Applicant states that he is still waiting for his hearing on 
appeal.  His wages are currently being garnished to pay state back taxes.  He has not 
yet started making payments toward the Federal back taxes, for which he owes 
approximately $50,000.  There is documentary evidence showing that he has filed his 
Federal income tax returns for tax year 2014.  Given this situation, there is insufficient 
evidence that he has acted reasonably and responsibly.  His actions demonstrate 
unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
