 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01432 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on November 
15, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 8. Applicant did not provide a 
response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit additional 
documents. Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on February 13, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.q. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1976. He married in 
1974 and has children ages 27, 25, and 19 years old. He served as a military officer from 
1976 to 1980 and was honorably discharged. Applicant disclosed in his November 2015 
security clearance application (SCA) that from August 2005 to September 2008 he was 
employed by a private company. In October 2008, he was given a severance package 
when his employer reduced its workforce. He indicated that from November 2008 until 
December 2009 he was unemployed and worked on writing a book and preparing himself 
to run for public office. His wife was employed, and they lived off of her income during this 
period. From January 2010 to June 2010 he worked as a private consultant. From July 
2010 until October 2015, Applicant was unemployed and was concentrating on his public 
office campaign. He has been employed by his present employer, a federal contractor, 
since November 2015.1  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions, credit 
reports from January 2016 and March 2014, and tax transcripts. Applicant disclosed in 
his December 2015 SCA that he failed to file his 2009, 2010, and 2011 federal and state 
income tax returns. He indicated he paid the approximately $10,000 he owed in 2014. He 
did not disclose he failed to timely file his 2014 federal and state income tax returns in his 
SCA. His explanation on his SCA for failing to file the 2009, 2010, and 2011 returns was 
“complex filing due to investments.”2 Applicant’s tax transcripts corroborate he was 
required to file federal and state income tax returns for these years.3 
 
 The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2014, and he failed to timely 
pay  taxes for the same years. Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in 
May 2016. He told the investigator that from July 2010 to October 2015, he worked as a 
volunteer on political campaigns. His family relied on severance packages that he and his 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR, will not be considered 
for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when making a credibility determination, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 Items 7, 8. 
 
3 
 
 
wife received from previous employers. He told the investigator that none of his financial 
problems were due to this period of unemployment, but instead dated back prior to 2008 
or were related to tax issues. He explained that his failure to file his income tax returns 
was because he and his wife had extensive investments in real estate, stocks provided 
to them by previous employers, and stocks purchased on the open market. Because of 
the complicated aspect of his tax returns, he sought assistance from the IRS, but was 
unhappy with its responses. No further explanation was provided. At some point, the IRS 
audited his tax returns from 2000 to 2008 and disallowed deductions for those tax years 
resulting in significant tax liabilities.4  
 
 Numerous federal tax liens were entered against Applicant. He provided IRS 
documents showing the federal tax lien entered December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.k-$9,334) and 
two liens entered in March 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.j-$208,687) were released in August 2014. 
Documents were not provided to verify the status of tax liens entered in May 2013 (SOR 
¶ 1.i-$394,122), October 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l-$71,406 and 1.m $35,279); May 2011 (SOR 
¶ 1.n-$839,076); and April 2006 (1.o-$181,926). An IRS transcript for tax year 2014 shows 
a tax lien entered in March 2017 in the amount of $245,245. No document was provided 
to show it is being paid.5  
 
 Applicant told the government investigator that his tax liens were released after he 
satisfied all tax debts in 2014, and he had documentation verifying it. He told the 
investigator he was unsure why the tax liens remained on his credit report, but intended 
to investigate and resolve them. He said he satisfied the tax liens with money withdrawn 
from his wife’s and his Individual Retirement Accounts (IRA), which created the 2014 tax 
consequences. He intended to pay this debt through the future sale of his home. Verifying 
documents were not provided.6  
 
 State tax documents from September 2016 show taxes owed for 2014 are 
$14,112. No documents were provided to show Applicant paid them. I am unable to 
determine from the state tax documents provided if the state tax liens in SOR ¶ 1.g 
($10,284) and ¶ 1.h ($50,481) were released.7  
 
Applicant also disclosed in the SCA that two condos he purchased around 2000 
were in the process of being foreclosed.8 In his SCA, he stated:  
 
These properties are in the process of being foreclosed as a result of my 
unemployment. As a result, the bank holding and company filed suit and 
                                                          
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 7. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 8. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
appropriately won the [judgment], so that the foreclose proceedings can be 
concluded.9 
 
He further stated: “We have been working with the banks to determine how best to handle 
this property going back to the bank.”10  
 
During his background interview with the government investigator in May 2016, 
Applicant stated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($160,295), 1.e ($65,771) and 1.f 
($111,507) related to mortgages owed for the condos. When he purchased them, he 
secured mortgages in the total amount of approximately $800,000. In 2008, when his 
employer downsized, and he no longer was working, he could not pay the monthly 
mortgage payments. He contacted the mortgage company and attempted to have it 
foreclose on the properties. Due to the market, it chose not to. Applicant told the 
investigator that he had not made payments on the accounts since 2008. In 2012, the 
parent company of the mortgagor obtained a civil judgment against Applicant holding him 
to the original terms of the agreement. Applicant was not financially able to bring the 
accounts current or pay them. He intended to address the properties in 2016 after he 
satisfied his tax debts. He believed if he was unable to pay the amounts owed, the 
mortgage company would foreclose and Applicant would pay the deficiency from the 
proceeds of the future sale of his home. Applicant did not provide updated information to 
show if he has taken action on the debts.11 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegations in ¶ 1.p ($1,449), a medical account. He told 
the government investigator that he was waiting for his insurance to complete its 
processing to determine if there was a balance owed. He did not provide documentary 
confirmation the debt is resolved. He told the investigator he previously had disputed the 
account in SOR ¶ 1.q ($181) owed to a telecommunications company, but decided to 
resolve it in 2015. He did not provide verification of the resolution.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s suitability eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Item 3. 
 
11 Items 3, 4. 
 
12 Items 2, 4. 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
6 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant was required to and failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2014 
federal and state income tax returns. He failed to timely pay his 2009, 2010, 2011, and 
2014 federal and state income taxes. He has numerous unpaid federal and state tax liens 
dating from 2006. He has other debts that are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2014 federal and state 
income tax returns. He told the government investigator that he sought assistance from 
the IRS on a complicated tax matter, but was unhappy with its response. It is unknown 
why that disagreement with IRS prevented him from timely filing and paying income taxes 
for four years. Applicant provided documents to show some of the federal tax liens were 
released, but he failed to provide corroborating evidence that the remaining ones are 
released. His documents show he owes $245,245 for his 2014 federal incomes taxes, 
which remain unpaid as of March 2017. He did not provide sufficient evidence that his 
state tax liens are released or that he paid and resolved the other debts alleged. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure 
to timely file and pay his income taxes liens and other debts cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant told the government investigator that his financial problems were not 
attributed to his almost five years of voluntary unemployment when he was working on 
political campaigns and pursuing his political aspirations. Rather, they were attributed to 
his disagreement with the IRS’s advice and an audit for earlier tax years. He indicated he 
had real estate investments, company stocks, and stocks he purchased, which 
complicated his tax returns. Applicant chose not to work in 2008 and subsequently he 
was unable to pay the mortgages on two investment properties. The real estate market 
during that time and later years may have been down, but the evidence does not support 
a conclusion that his failure to make his mortgage payments was primarily due to market 
conditions. The evidence does not support that Applicant’s financial problems were 
largely beyond his control or that he acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 There is evidence Applicant resolved the federal tax liens in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.j in 
2014. AG ¶ 20(g) applies to these tax liens. Although these tax liens were released in 
2014, Applicant’s failure to timely pay these taxes, which then required action by the IRS 
to enforce, does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve his legal obligations. There is 
insufficient evidence to show the numerous remaining federal and state tax liens have 
been released; that he has made arrangements with the IRS and the state tax authority 
regarding the liens and his 2014 federal and state tax liability; or that he has made 
payment arrangements for other outstanding debts. There is no evidence Applicant has 
received financial counseling. There are not clear indications that the problems are being 
resolved or under control, or that there are payment arrangements with the taxing 
authorities. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old college educated veteran. He failed to file and pay his 
federal and state income taxes for several years. He incurred other debts that he has not 
resolved.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 13 
 
Applicant’s history of non-compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to timely 
file and pay federal and state income taxes raises serious concerns. Applicant has more 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
9 
 
 
than $1.52 million dollars in federal tax liens; $60,665 in state tax liens; and $339,200 in 
other delinquent debts. He has not acted responsibly toward other financial obligations. 
The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
