 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03963 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 27, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on March 16, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 3. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, 
provide documentary evidence, or object to the Government’s evidence, and it is 
admitted. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2007 and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2009. He has never been married and has no children. He has 
worked for his employer, a federal contractor, since 2007.2  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his April 2017 security clearance application (SCA) that he 
began using marijuana in June 2005 and used it every day from June 2007 to January 
2015. He continued to use it until March 2017, with varying frequency. He could not 
estimate the number of times he used it after January 2015, but stated it was sporadic.3  
 
Applicant also disclosed on his SCA that he used “cocaine or crack cocaine (such 
as rock, freebase, etc.) from June 2012 until March 2017. His frequency of use was “once 
every few months. Sometimes use would span 2-3 days.”4 He estimated he used cocaine 
during this period 20-40 times.5  
 
Applicant disclosed he used Ecstasy from June 2010 to June 2011, about three to 
five times. He used hallucinogenic mushrooms from June 2011 to April 2012 about three 
times. He used Adderall, which was not prescribed to him, once in about April 2012.6  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s answer is dated January 27, 2017, which is clearly a clerical error, and should have been 
2018. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 2.  
 
6 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant purchased marijuana about once a week from June 2007 to January 
2015. He purchased cocaine, with varying frequency, from about June 2012 to March 
2017.7  
 
 A SCA question asked if Applicant intended to use each of these drugs in the 
future. He indicated “no” and stated his intention as to each drug: “If using this drug will 
prevent me from obtaining/holding a security clearance it is no problem to refuse use 
going forward.”8 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2017. He told the 
investigator that from 2007 to 2015, he purchased one ounce of marijuana biweekly from 
his mother who had a medical marijuana prescription. He would use it with friends in a 
social setting. In 2015, he stopped purchasing marijuana from his mother and used it less 
often. He told the investigator that he did not plan to use or purchase marijuana in the 
future.9  
 
Applicant described his use of illegal drugs as recreational. He told the investigator 
that he used the illegal drugs with various friends. He remains in contact with the friends 
associated with his prior drug use as they have been friends for many years. He told the 
investigator he did not plan to use illegal drugs in the future.10  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated he is ready to commit to making 
changes in his life as it is important for the advancement of his career. He requested a 
chance to demonstrate positive changes in his behavior. He stated: “I experimented with 
substances throughout my 20’s. However, I have never been arrested.”11 He stated he is 
not an addict, and he has not had legal problems or treatment. He stated that he is willing 
and able to disavow the use of illegal substances, but is not willing to disassociate with 
his friends who are drug users, however, he will leave the area if they are using drugs.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
7 Item 6. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Item 3.  
 
11 Item 1. 
 
12 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
 
5 
 
 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.  
 
 From June 2005 to March 2017, Applicant used various illegal drugs to include: 
marijuana, cocaine, Ecstasy, hallucinogenic mushrooms, and the illegal use of the 
prescription drug Adderall on one occasion. He purchased marijuana once a week from 
June 2007 to January 2015. He purchased cocaine with varying frequency from June 
2012 to March 2017. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were being used; and (3) providing 
a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility; 
 
(d) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and  
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has been a regular drug abuser since 2005. A month before he 
completed his SCA, he indicated he ceased his illegal drug use. Applicant stated his use 
was recreational and he “experimented” with drugs during his 20s. The facts indicate 
otherwise. He disclosed he used marijuana every day from June 2007 to January 2015. 
Applicant was purchasing marijuana weekly. He used cocaine once every few months 
and sometimes the use would span two to three days. He estimated he used cocaine 
during this period 20-40 times. He said his last drug use was March 2017, a month before 
completing his SCA. He is willing to stop using illegal drugs in the future in order to 
enhance his career opportunities. However, he is not willing to disassociate from his 
friends who continue to use illegal drugs. Although, he stated he has not purchased 
marijuana from his mother since 2015, the availability of it to him is evident. There is 
insufficient evidence that future illegal drug use is unlikely to recur. His illegal drug use, 
spanning over 12 years and occurring while working for a federal contractor, casts doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does 
not apply. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily disclosed his past illegal drug use on his SCA and when he 
was interviewed by a government investigator. He acknowledged his past substance 
misuse. Based on his lengthy drug use, his relatively short period of abstinence is 
insufficient. Applicant stated that he has not had legal problems or drug treatment. The 
fact that Applicant has never been caught purchasing or using illegal drugs does not 
negate the fact that he was participating in illegal activity for years. It appears Applicant 
fails to appreciate that his conduct was illegal. The fact that Applicant has not participated 
in treatment and received a positive prognosis is a concern. Applicant stated in his answer 
to the SOR that he is committed to not using illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) only 
applies as it pertains to his statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
 
 Applicant used a prescription drug that was not prescribed to him. The evidence 
does not support a finding that his use was due to a prolonged illness. AG ¶ 26(c) does 
not apply. There is no evidence Applicant successfully completed a drug treatment 
program or was evaluated for his excessive long-term drug use. AG ¶ 26(d) does not 
apply. There is minimal mitigation to overcome the security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
past illegal drug use and substance misuse. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment about one’s conduct, that creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence 
entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, professional, 
or community standing; and  
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Applicant used illegal drugs from 2005 to 2017 and purchased illegal drugs until 
2015. His conduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation, as it is the type of conduct, which 
if known, could affect his professional standing. He continues to associate with his friends 
who use illegal drugs. The evidence supports the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, has 
ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or unwilling to comply with 
rules and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s illegal conduct spanning over 12 years is not minor or infrequent. It did 
not happen under unique circumstances. The evidence is insufficient to conclude it is 
unlikely to recur as Applicant continues to associate with his friends who use illegal drugs. 
Applicant’s conduct extended beyond the period of youthful indiscretion. His conduct 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The above mitigating 
conditions do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2007. He 
has used illegal drugs since 2005, and from 2007 to 2015 he used marijuana daily. He 
used other illegal drugs with varying frequency. He illegally purchased marijuana and 
cocaine for many years. Although, he stated he is committed to being drug-free in the 
future, he continues to associate with friends who use illegal drugs. He does not appear 
to have an appreciation that his use and purchase of illegal drugs is criminal. The record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance 
misuse, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
