 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04059 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 19, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on February 22, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. The Government’s 
evidence is admitted. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He attended college, but did not earn a degree. He 
married in 1995. He has four children, ages 18, 19, 21, and 27 years old, and one 
stepchild, age 26 years old. In his July 2016 security clearance application (SCA), he 
disclosed he has been self-employed since 2008. His August 2017 background 
investigation summary indicated he works for a federal contractor, though it is unknown 
for how long. It appears Applicant’s self-employment is on a part-time basis.1 
 
 Applicant disclosed in his SCA that he had delinquent debts. He attributed them to 
financial mismanagement and a tight budget. Applicant disclosed the following status for 
different delinquent debts: debt was in collection; payment arrangement was being made; 
debt had been charged off and a balance was due; had contacted the creditor to make a 
payment arrangement; and had contacted the creditor and set up a payment plan. He 
provided the following statement: “I am working improving my money management skills. 
Recently my wife and I completed a Dave Ramsey course to improve our money 
management.”2  
 
 During his August 2017 interview, Applicant confirmed to the government 
investigator that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, and 
1.p belonged to him. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k is a repossessed vehicle. He told the 
investigator he had a payment plan with the creditor, but had not made payments since 
May 2016. He said he had contacted the cell phone provider in SOR ¶ 1.g and had plans 
to pay this debt. He had not contacted any of the other creditors indicated above and had 
made no attempt to pay these delinquent debts. The debts date back to 2010.3  
 
Applicant explained to the investigator that he made poor financial decisions over 
the years and became overextended. He was paying his children’s college tuition and 
extracurricular activities, which became more than he could financially afford. He intended 
to pay his delinquent debts. His children were supposed to graduate college in August 
2017. Once that happened, he planned to pay his student loans and his cell phone debt 
in full. He planned to seek the help of a credit service professional. He said that the total 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
amount of his delinquent debts was not very high and could be resolved very quickly. He 
did not want to file bankruptcy. 
 
The debts in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions and credit 
reports from November 2016 and September 2017. The delinquent debts include student 
loans, vehicle repossession, personal loans, insurance, cell phone service, and other 
consumer debts. The total delinquent amount alleged is approximately $27,827. Three of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are under $100.4 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated he was working on “getting the debt 
cleared up and planning on joining my employee financial resource center program.”5 He 
stated: 
 
I currently have two sons in college and one on the way this fall. I didn’t plan 
good enough for the cost of education and thus my personal budget took a 
hit. After the repossession I self-reported what happened. I had to take the 
credit hit so my sons could get [an] education and wouldn’t be burdened 
with excessive loans. I am working to improve my situation.6 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from his pastor. He is described as a man of 
integrity and committed to his family. He has been a benefit to the church with his help. 
He has a strong character and stable lifestyle.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous unresolved delinquent debts and student loans from at 
least 2010. He is unable or unwilling to satisfy the delinquent debts. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations. Some of his debts 
date back to 2010 and continue to the present. He disclosed many of the delinquent debts 
during his 2016 background interview and indicated he had taken a financial management 
course to resolve them. During his 2017 background interview, he told the investigator he 
had not addressed his delinquent debts despite confirming some were ones he had 
previously disclosed. Applicant did not provide evidence that he has paid, resolved, or is 
resolving any of the delinquent debts alleged. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
his financial problem are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure to pay even the smallest 
 
6 
 
 
delinquent debts cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to poor financial management, a tight 
budget, and having children in college. These are not conditions beyond his control. He 
stated in his July 2016 SCA that he participated in a financial management course. 
However, he failed to provide evidence that he has addressed any of his delinquent debts. 
The evidence does not support a finding that Applicant’s financial problems were beyond 
his control or that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
 Based on his SCA disclosure, there is evidence Applicant has received financial 
counseling. However, there is insufficient evidence to conclude there are clear indications 
that his financial problems are being resolved or under control. No documented evidence 
was provided to show Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay any of his overdue 
creditors. He stated in his SOR answer that he is working on improving his financial 
situation, but failed to provide evidence of actions to pay, resolve, or make payment 
arrangements with his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. He attributed his financial problems to poor money 
management and a tight budget. Applicant prioritized his children’s college education over 
 
7 
 
 
paying his delinquent debts. Although it is understandable that he wanted to help his 
children, he has done so to the detriment of his total financial well-being and has 
subsequently accumulated delinquent debts that remain unresolved. In addition, some 
debts date back to 2010 and 2012, likely well before his children started college. He has 
not made payments to resolve any of delinquent debts, three of which are under $100. 
Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
