KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s arguments are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 17-01264.a1
DATE: 07/11/2018
DATE: July 11, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 17-01264
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On May 15, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On March 7, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a
trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law. Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 12 delinquent debts totaling about $65,000.  He
admitted all of the SOR allegations.  He attributed his financial problems to having to find another
job after a base closure in 1996 and to maintaining two households while living apart from his wife
and young child.  In 2011, he hired a law firm to consolidate and resolve his debts.  The law firm
handled six of the SOR debts and reported that collection on two of those debts was barred by the
statute of limitations.  Two other alleged debts were consolidated into an alleged judgment that the
law firm was unable to resolve.  Four non-alleged debts were listed as settled.  The law firm
refunded over $7,000 by placing the money in an escrow account.  Recently, he hired a credit-repair
firm, but did not submit any evidence regarding its actions.  
Of the alleged debts, Applicant has a time-share mortgage loan in foreclosure that he has not
taken any action to resolve.  He claimed he resolved two other debts, but provided no supporting
documentation.  The credit-repair firm is investigating another debt, but he was unable to provide
information about it.  Three medical debts are unresolved because he was too busy and forgot about
them, but he intends to pay them.  
Applicant and his wife earn about $80,000 annually and have a net monthly remainder of
about $400.  His brother testified that Applicant is hardworking, dependable, and a devoted family
man.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found in favor of Applicant on two duplicative allegations and against him on the
remaining allegations.  Two debts are time barred for collection; however, reliance on a statute of
2
limitations does not constitute a good faith effort to resolve a debt.1  While he hired a credit-repair
firm to challenge debts on his credit report, he provided no proof that debts have been challenged. 
There is no clear evidence his debts are under control.  
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant submitted some documents, including letters from creditors,
that post-date the Judge’s decision.  Those documents constitute new evidence that the Appeal Board
cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not give sufficient weight to his evidence.  In doing
so, he notes that he hired a law firm to resolve certain debts and that some debts reached the statute
of limitations.   His arguments, however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-
14629 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2008).  
Applicant has failed to establish the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set
forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances:
such a determination “. . . may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”   ADP Case No. 12-09387 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  See also Kaplan v.
Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
1 In discussing the statute of limitations, the Judge cited to ISCR Case No. 11-08274 (App. Bd. May 2,
2013), which states:
The reliance on the statutes of limitation fails on two grounds.  First, the assertion is not supported by
the record.  Applicant did not submit any information regarding the specific terms of the credit
agreements, which would have provided a reasoned determination as to which statute of limitation
applied.  Second, security clearance decisions are not controlled or limited by any statute of limitation,
and reliance on the non-collectability of a debt does [not] constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that
debt within the meaning of the Directive.  The federal government is entitled to consider the facts and
circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a
timely manner.  Applicant’s decision not to pay his debts reflects poorly on his judgment, reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  Applicant’s decision also shows an
unwillingness to take responsibility for his actions.    
Id. at 2. 
3
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan    
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale      
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy       
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
