 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03816 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on February 2, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant submitted a timely response and 
his exhibits are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. There were no 
objections by Applicant or Department Counsel, and all Items and Exhibits are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He is a high school graduate. He married in 2000 and 
separated from his wife in 2015. He has custody of his two children, ages 17 and 15 years 
old. Applicant did not disclose any periods of unemployment. He has been employed by 
the same federal contractor since 2008.  
 
 In October 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In it 
he disclosed he had delinquent debts. He attributed the debts to being a single income 
family. He indicated he intended to make payment arrangements to resolve the debts. He 
stated that he had paid off a loan and would pay the outstanding debts. These debts 
included credit cards, medical accounts and a cable bill. He stated his student loans were 
under control and in good standing. He was working on contacting the other creditors to 
address the debts.1  
 
 In April 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He was 
confronted with his delinquent debts. He explained that his wife never had stable 
employment, which resulted in his family living beyond their means. She eventually 
became a stay-at-home mother, which caused a bigger financial strain on the family. They 
had to rely only on Applicant’s income. He began accruing credit card debts to get by 
financially. In 2015, he and his wife separated. He is a single father raising his two 
children. He intends to file for divorce. He explained that all of his delinquent debts 
accumulated because he could not afford to pay them on his salary. He admitted he was 
irresponsible financially which led to the delinquent debts. He was focused on a smooth 
separation from his wife to make sure the children adjusted. He told the investigator that 
he was financially responsible and living within his means. He stated that he had 
consolidated his student loans and was making monthly payments. He planned on 
contacting all of the creditors with delinquent accounts within two months to begin 
payment plans. 2 
 
                                                          
1 I have not considered debts that Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application that were not 
alleged in the SOR for disqualifying purposes. I may consider his prior financial history for purposes of 
making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigating conditions and in my whole-person 
analysis.  
 
2 Item 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 In Applicant’s December 2017 answer to the SOR, he again stated that he fell 
behind on his debts because he is a single father. He said his son has medical issues, 
but did not elaborate on how they impacted his finances, only that it took time and 
attention. He reiterated that he told the investigator he intended to pay his delinquent 
debts. He said his student loans were not in default, but were sold to a different company 
and are under control. He said he was making monthly payments. He said: “I do what I 
can with what I’m provided and take my job serious, while trying to raise my sons that live 
with me.”3 He intended to take out a loan to pay all of his delinquent debts. He said he 
attributed his financial problems to the “lack of income that was los[t] in my separation 
from spouse.” He said he would pay the debts in January 2018.  
 
 In Applicant’s February 2018 response to the FORM, he said his student loans 
were current and not in default. He did not provide supporting documents to show the 
loans were consolidated and that he was making monthly payments. He said that he 
obtained a loan from his 401(k) account to pay off all of his delinquent debts. He was not 
eligible to take another loan from his 401(k) until February 23, 2018. He anticipated he 
would receive the money in March 2018 and then would pay the delinquent debts.4  
 
 The document Applicant provided, which shows information about his 401(k) 
account, indicated that he paid off a previous loan from the account on February 13, 2018, 
and there is a ten-day waiting period after a loan is paid off before he is eligible to take 
out a new loan. Applicant did not provide information about how the proceeds of the 
previous loan were used. Applicant did not provide evidence that he contacted creditors 
and made payment arrangement to settle the debts. There is no evidence Applicant has 
paid any of the alleged debts.5  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are documented by Applicant admissions and credit 
reports from October 2017, August 2016, and October 2016.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
3 Item 2. 
 
4 AE A, B. 
 
5 AE A, B.  
 
6 Items 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous unresolved delinquent debts and student loans. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
6 
 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations. He disclosed 
delinquent debts when he completed his SCA in 2013. He was confronted with the 
delinquent debts during his 2017 background interview. He promised to address the 
delinquent debts that were brought to his attention by the investigator. He stated his 
student loans were current, but failed to provide supporting documentation. Applicant 
intended to take a loan from his 401(k) to pay his debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his behavior is unlikely to recur. It continues to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to being separated from his spouse and 
being a single father. During his background interview, he admitted that he lived beyond 
his means and did not act responsibly. This was within his control. He said his wife worked 
sporadically and then became a stay-at-home mother before their separation. He later 
attributed his financial problems to the loss of her income, which may have been beyond 
his control. He mentioned his son had medical problems, but did not provide sufficient 
information to show how it impacted his finances. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant has a significant history of not paying 
bills. He failed to provide documented evidence that he has addressed his student loans 
and is making monthly payments. He promised to pay his delinquent debts when he 
obtained a new loan from his 401(k), but had to comply with a waiting period because he 
had recently repaid a previous loan from the account. None of his debts have been paid. 
The evidence is insufficient to support he has acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude there are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved or under control. No documented evidence was provided to show 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors. Applicant has 
promised to pay his creditors when he receives a loan, but that has not occurred. He did 
not provide evidence that he has negotiated payment plans or made other arrangements 
with creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He has been struggling financially. He is a single father 
caring for his two sons. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show he has been 
making payments for his student loans. He has not made payments to resolve his other 
delinquent debts, but promises to do so after he obtains a loan. At this juncture, Applicant 
has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
