1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            ) ISCR Case No. 17-04116 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his 
problematic financial history and his personal conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided 
against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on March 3, 2017. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On January 8, 2018, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
2 
 
the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
and Guideline E for personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on January 12, 2018, 
and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On March 12, 2018, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on March 13, 2018. He was given 30 days 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on March 28, 2018. Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4.3 GE 1 through 3 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. GE 4 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s 
interview that took place in July 2017 during the background investigation. The ROI is not 
authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.4 Department Counsel’s 
written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 4 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 24 years old and a high school graduate with some college credits. He 
has never married and has a daughter, age 2. Applicant served on active duty with the 
United States Marine Corps from August 2012 until November 2014. He received a 
                                                          
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 Items 1 and 2 are the SOR and Applicant’s Answer, respectively. Because they are the pleadings, they 
are not marked as exhibits.   
 
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
General Discharge. Since August 2016, Applicant has been employed by a defense 
contractor.5 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges two delinquent debts totaling $12,479. The 
second debt is a charge-off with no balance due.6 Including the high credit makes the 
delinquent debt total $14,028.  Applicant admitted the first delinquent debt but denied the 
second debt. The second debt, however, is supported by the credit reports.7 
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that during his background interview Applicant 
intentionally refused to cooperate and provide details of his disciplinary record while 
serving in the Marine Corps. The SOR also alleged that Applicant was discharged from 
the Marine Corps due to a pattern of misconduct and received nonjudicial punishment for: 
(1) operating an unregistered vehicle without a valid driver’s license (2013); (2) disobeying 
an order and fraternization (2014); and (3) driving under the influence while operating a 
government vehicle (2014).8 Applicant admitted those allegations.9 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”11 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
                                                          
5 GE 1. Applicant described his discharge as General “other than honorable” due to a “pattern of 
misconduct.” Id.  
 
6 SOR ¶ 1; GE 2, p.2; GE 3, p. 5.  
 
7 Answer ¶ 1; GE 2, p.2; GE 3, p. 5.  
 
8 SOR ¶ 2.  
 
9 Answer ¶ 2.  
 
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
4 
 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations   
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,20 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information….21 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
                                                          
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
21 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying  
conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
   In analyzing the facts of this case, I also considered the following mitigating 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG 20 ¶(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant admitted the first SOR debt. Facts admitted by an applicant in an answer 
to an SOR require no further proof by the Government.22 And the second delinquent debt 
is supported by the record. The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a 
problematic financial history, and that his financial problems continue to this day. Security 
concerns are raised under AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), and (c).  The next inquiry is whether any 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
                                                          
22 ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR 
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 
(App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal 
basis for an Administrative Judge’s findings”). 
 
6 
 
Because Applicant’s delinquencies are ongoing, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Similarly, there is nothing in the record to support the establishment of mitigating factors 
under AG ¶¶ 20(b), (c), and (d).   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶¶ 15(a) and (b) and AG ¶ 16(d)(3) set forth the specific concerns based on 
personal conduct that are applicable in this case:  
 
 15. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and 
candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility 
determination, security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for 
national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with 
security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security investigator 
for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized and 
required;  
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in connection with 
a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. . .  
 
16. (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . : 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . . 
 
Applicant admitted the Guideline E allegations. Thus, the factual predicate for 
security concerns has been established.23 Applicant’s intentional refusal to cooperate 
during the security clearance background interview triggers disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 15(a) and (b). In addition, Applicant’s pattern of misconduct while serving in the Marine 
Corps triggers disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(d)(3). I have carefully considered the 
mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 17. None of them apply here.  
                                                          
23 See note 22, supra.  
 
7 
 
The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.24 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant failed to meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E              Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant     
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
24 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
