 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 17-02227 
  ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant incurred delinquent debts, however her finances are now under control. 
She has mitigated the Guideline F (Financial Considerations) concern. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 1, 2016. On July 11, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. The 
DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
written record without a hearing. On October 12, 2017, Applicant requested a hearing in 
front of an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on November 
8, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on November 22, 2017. That same day, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for the agreed upon date of November 29, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 3 through 10 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted Applicant’s 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (AX) A through G, which were admitted without objection. Applicant objected to 
GX 2, the background investigator’s summary of Applicant’s personal subject interview, 
on the basis that it did not include the statements that the investigator made to Applicant 
about her debts. Applicant testified about the statements the investigator made, otherwise 
confirmed the accuracy of the summary, and I admitted the document. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2017. 
 
Department Counsel amended SOR ¶¶ 1.z, 1.aa, and 1.bb which alleged that 
Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government for three tax liens, by striking “Federal 
Government” and adding “State of South Carolina” in each of the allegations. Applicant 
admitted these amended allegations, but disputed the current amounts of the liens.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old claims customer service advocate employed by her 
current Federal contractor employer since March 1990. She is uncertain when she was 
first granted a position of public trust. Applicant married in 2000, separated in 2005, and 
divorced in 2012. Applicant has two adult children who are independent, and a 19-year-
old son who resides with her. 
 
 The SOR alleges 28 delinquent accounts which include: a $11,245 deficiency 
balance on a repossessed mobile home (SOR ¶ 1.a); a student loan that is $303 past due 
within $20,259 balance (SOR ¶ 1.b); a $6,697 deficiency balance on a repossessed 
vehicle (SOR ¶ 1.c); and, 18 delinquent medical accounts totaling $10,880 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.g through 1.k, 1.m. through 1.p, and, 1.r through 1.y.) Applicant admits knowledge of 
the accounts, however she is disputing several of them, including SOR ¶ 1.a and several 
of the medical accounts, and she further states that many of the alleged medical accounts 
are duplicates. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 After Applicant married her husband in 2000, they struggled financially, due 
primarily to her husband’s inability to maintain steady employment. Applicant periodically 
took personal loans to help cover the family’s expenses. After she and her husband 
separated in 2005, Applicant’s three children resided with her. Applicant’s husband did 
not pay child support during their period of separation, or after they divorced in 2012. 
Applicant incurred all of the SOR medical debt between 2012 and 2014 due to several 
health issues from which she suffers, and for necessary medical care for her children. 
Because her finances were tight, Applicant sometimes prioritized providing for her 
children over paying her outstanding medical bills. (Tr. 87-92.) 
 
 Prior to completing her 2016 e-QIP, Applicant contracted with a debt-consolidation 
company in an effort to resolve her delinquent accounts. The debt-consolidation company 
disputed several medical debts. Additionally, Applicant entered repayment plans with 
several of her medical and other creditors and made payments. However, due to unusual 
and unforeseen expenses, to include a $290 auto repair in September 2017, a $225 auto 
repair in October 2017, and a $472 auto repair in November 2017, she was unable to 
maintain the payments. (Answer; AX G.) 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant underwent her personal subject interview with the background 
investigator on March 27, 2017. Applicant testified that the summary of the interview did 
not reflect information that the investigator provided to Applicant. Specifically, Applicant 
credibly testified that after discussing her delinquent accounts with the investigator, the 
investigator told Applicant that her job was not in jeopardy, and that rushing to pay the 
accounts would not make a difference in the adjudication of her suitability to maintain her 
position of trust. Applicant relied on these representations, and did not immediately 
resume her repayment plans or begin addressing additional delinquent accounts. 
However, she made a successful effort to remain current on her ongoing financial 
responsibilities. (Tr. 23-25; GX 4.) 
 
Upon receiving the SOR in July 2017, Applicant realized that her delinquent 
accounts created a concern. She immediately began contacting her creditors and 
restarting repayment plans or entering into new agreements. She has taken control of her 
finances by entering repayment agreements with many of her creditors, disputing several 
accounts, and earning additional money by working a part-time job. Applicant has not 
incurred any delinquent medical debt since 2014, incurred one delinquent account (SOR 
¶ 1.c) in 2016, and none since then. (GX 4.) 
 
The $11,245 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for the balance on a repossessed mobile 
home. Applicant disputed this debt through a credit-consolidation company in 2016. 
Applicant lived in a mobile home from 1997 to 2014 and made timely mortgage-loan 
monthly payments, which included insurance. Applicant discovered a defect in the outer 
structure of her mobile home and contacted her insurance company for repairs. The 
insurance company initially made repairs for water-penetration damage to the floor and 
walls. However, the problem recurred and the insurance company refused additional 
repairs, claiming that Applicant had been negligent in maintaining the home. Applicant 
emphatically states that she properly, and frequently, performed maintenance on the 
home. Eventually, mold and mildew in the walls due to recurring water penetration caused 
health problems for Applicant’s son. Applicant agreed to move out and leave possession 
of the home to the mortgage-loan creditor. Between March 1997 and April 2014, Applicant 
made 409 monthly payments on the mobile-home mortgage-loan account, which had an 
initial balance of $23,601. The loan creditor was granted possession of the mobile home 
by the County Court in September 2014. There was no monetary judgment award. (GX 
3; GX 8.) Applicant was never contacted about a balance due on the mobile-home 
mortgage-loan and has recently disputed the amount claimed by the creditor to the three 
major credit reporting agencies. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant helped finance her two adult children’s college educations by taking out 
parent and student loans on their behalf. The delinquent student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b is no longer past due and is in forbearance. Applicant will make $108 payments, which 
are within her budget, beginning in October 2018.  (AX A; Tr. 42-44.) 
 
The $6,697 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is the balance due on a repossessed vehicle. 
Applicant purchased a car for her son to use while working and attending college in 
August 2015, and her son made the $258 monthly payments. Not long after purchasing 
the car, it stopped running, however, Applicant’s son continued to make the payments. 
 
4 
 
After several months, Applicant’s son lost his job, was unable to maintain the payments, 
and the car was repossessed. The creditor offered Applicant a settlement of $2,000, 
however she was unable to pay the entire amount when offered. Applicant entered a 
repayment agreement with the creditor of $100 a month. She will settle this account as 
soon as she is able. (Tr. 44-45; AX B.) 
 
Applicant was primarily treated at two separate hospitals for her medical 
conditions. However, she was billed by several different departmental groups within those 
two hospitals, two of which groups have very similar names. One of those groups with 
similar names has since disbanded, which has further complicated Applicant’s efforts to 
resolve these debts. Since first attempting in 2016 to consolidate her medical accounts 
and enter repayment plans with the creditors, Applicant has encountered extreme 
difficulty in trying to locate the appropriate creditor for each of the medical accounts, 
received inaccurate information from the creditor’s representatives, and has been 
charged for duplicate accounts. Additionally, Applicant has been personally billed for 
charges which should have been covered by her insurance carrier. Applicant continues 
to try to get accurate information to resolve these accounts, and has disputed several 
accounts with the creditors and the credit reporting agencies. Applicant has consolidated 
several of her accounts, and has made payments on the consolidated accounts. (Answer; 
AX C; GX 4; Tr. 49-68; Tr. 70-111.)  
 
The $6,241 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is for consolidated medical accounts owed 
to the same creditor. This total includes SOR ¶¶ 1.h for $177; 1.i for $165; 1.r for $153; 
1.w for $60, as well as other non-SOR charges. Applicant disputed these accounts 
because she did not receive notice of them, and had believed that her insurance company 
covered these costs. She made multiple attempts to receive more information about the 
accounts from her insurance company. She ultimately was able to speak with a customer 
service representative who retrieved archived explanation-of-benefits documents from 
her accounts. The documents show that Applicant’s insurance company did not timely file 
its claims, but that no balance is due by Applicant. Applicant also contacted the medical 
creditor and its collection agency, neither of which showed payments due by Applicant 
for these accounts. These debts are resolved. (Answer.) 
 
The $1,011 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for a delinquent cellular telephone 
account. Applicant first entered a repayment plan in June 2016. She has now entered a 
new repayment agreement of $50 per month. (AX G.) 
 
The $298 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is owed to a cable company. This debt was 
initially $598 for unreturned equipment and services. Applicant returned the equipment 
and entered a repayment plan in July 2016. Due to unforeseen expenses, she was unable 
to maintain the payments. However, she is now making monthly payments. 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g for $250 and 1.u for $94 are for delinquent medical 
accounts owed to the same creditor, which is the aforementioned disbanded 
departmental group. Applicant contacted the creditor by telephone and made a payment. 
When she again contacted the creditor to make another payment, she was informed that 
the medical office had closed, the physicians had gone their separate ways, and the 
 
5 
 
representative had no way to accept a payment. The representative gave Applicant a post 
office box address, and Applicant sent a payment to that address. She never received 
confirmation of her payment, and has not made any additional payments. 
 
Despite several attempts, Applicant has been unable to locate the appropriate 
medical creditors for the $935, the $328, and the $44 accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.n 
and 1.x. She disputes these accounts, but will continue to make efforts to find the creditors 
and resolve the accounts. (Answer.) 
 
On Applicant’s behalf, the debt-consolidation company Applicant hired in 2016 
contested SOR ¶¶ 1.k for $692; 1.o for $328; 1.p for $271; 1.t for $110; 1.v for $62; and, 
1.y for $718, as shown on Applicant’s June 2017 credit bureau report. (GX 4.) However, 
she entered into an agreement in July 2016 for the consolidated repayment to the creditor 
of these medical accounts. (GX 1; GX 2; Answer; AX E.) Applicant has made several 
payments on these consolidated accounts, and has been offered a 35% discount on the 
balance when she is ready to pay it off. (AX E; Tr. 72.) 
 
The $477 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l is for a personal loan to a local credit union. 
Applicant secured this loan through an online process, with repayment made through 
direct debits from her account. Applicant thinks she repaid this loan in full, and disputes 
the debt. However, she entered a repayment agreement with this creditor and has made 
several payments. (AX D; Answer.) 
 
The $398 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is owed to the same medical creditor 
as the consolidated debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. When contacting the medical creditor 
about other alleged SOR debts, the medical creditor located SOR ¶ 1.m for $398 and 
another unalleged debt of $467. The medical creditor consolidated these debts and 
Applicant is making $50 monthly payments. (AX C; Tr. 55-57.)  
 
The $158 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q is for a satellite television account. 
Applicant contacted this creditor and began a $50 per month repayment plan. 
 
Applicant hired a tax preparer, who miscalculated her state taxes owed for tax 
years 2012, 2014, and 2015. The state entered three liens against Applicant in 2017. 
Applicant has been paying these liens through a biweekly garnishment of $113 since April 
2017. As of November 28, 2017, Applicant owed a balance of $321 on the three combined 
liens. 
Applicant’s former coworker and friend testified that Applicant is hard-working, 
trustworthy, and a person of integrity. She notes that Applicant has been a single parent 
for many years and that she has been responsible in managing her limited finances. (Tr. 
124-127.) 
 
Policies 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
 
6 
 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The record evidence establishes that SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.r, and 1.w are included in 
the consolidated debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. I have not considered the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.r, or 1.w when evaluating Applicant’s financial status. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice).  
  
 
7 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 Applicant incurred debt due to circumstances that were largely beyond her control, 
primarily, her medical conditions, single parenthood, and car problems. Her separation 
and ultimate divorce from her husband deepened her financial difficulties. Applicant 
initially acted responsibly and in good faith by contracting with a credit-consolidating 
company in 2016 to repay her creditors. Following her personal subject interview in 2017, 
she relied on statements made by the background investigator to her detriment. Upon 
realizing the potential negative impact of her delinquent accounts on her eligibility for 
maintaining her position of trust, she took immediate action and contacted her creditors, 
and both reestablished and established repayment plans. She also disputed several 
accounts and provided evidence that she is not personally responsible for the $6,241 
medical account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant brought the student loan accounts 
current, was granted forbearance by the lender until October 2018, at which point the 
payments will be within her budget. Although Applicant has not fully resolved the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, she provided credible testimony and documentation supporting the 
legitimacy of her dispute. 
 
 
8 
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A trustworthiness adjudication is an evaluation of a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 While legally responsible for the state tax liens entered against her, Applicant did 
not incur these debts through irresponsible behavior, but as the result of a professional 
tax preparer’s error. The fact that Applicant is paying this debt through garnishment rather 
than a voluntary effort diminishes its mitigating force. ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Aug.26, 2010). However, payment by garnishment does not bar mitigation of financial 
concerns. ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep 26, 2006). The three combined 
debts now total less than $325.  
  
 Applicant has not incurred any recent delinquent debts, and currently lives within 
her means. The majority of her debts are owed for delinquent medical accounts, which 
are not indicative of poor judgment or irresponsible spending. Applicant has addressed 
and is repaying the debts for which she is liable in a responsible manner. Although her 
financial record is not perfect, she has implemented a reasonable plan to resolve her 
financial issues within her means. Applicant’s financial difficulties do not cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant successfully disputed 
several of her accounts. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e). AG ¶ 20(a) and 20(g) partially 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9 
 
If I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
  
Applicant has worked for the same employer for over 28 years, and is held in high 
esteem by her former coworker. She is a hard-working and dedicated single mother who 
works a second job in order to improve her financial circumstances.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.bb:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
