 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-01672 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to mitigate the concerns related to foreign influence raised by his relatives and friend in 
India. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On February 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). June 24, 2017, in accordance with the Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raised security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 21, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
on October 24, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 16, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 for Administrative Notice. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 
24, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government Counsel requested I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to the Republic of India (India). Department Counsel provided a 
nine-page summary of the facts, supported by ten Government documents, identified as 
HE 1, collectively. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s request. Hence, I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute and are set out in the Findings 
of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He was born in India. He immigrated to the United 
States at the age of 24, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 1994. He 
has held a security clearance since 2007, without incident. He is married to a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. They have two natural-born U.S. citizen sons. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 
17, 20.) 
 
 Applicant’s family were refugees to India. He lived in the northeastern part of 
India, which was isolated from the rest of India. He did not develop any sense of loyalty 
to India. (Tr. 18.) He immigrated to the United States to pursue higher education in 
1979. He earned a master’s degree in 1982 and a doctorate in 1986, both from a U.S 
university. He joined his current employer in 1992. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s cousin is a citizen of India and is currently employed as an 
ambassador from India to a foreign nation. Applicant would see her monthly at family 
events as a youth. Applicant indicated he has infrequent contact with his cousin and 
does not speak to her on the phone. He last saw her in person in June 2016, while she 
was working in the United States. Prior to that, they met in 2013. Applicant does not 
discuss work with his cousin. (Tr. 15, 23-24.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother-in-law are citizens and residents in India. 
His mother is 93 years old. Applicant calls her weekly and visits her in India annually. 
He calls his sister twice a year. He has given power of attorney to his sister so that 
when their mother passes away, his sister can dispose of their mother’s assets. He 
does not retain any property interest in his mother’s estate. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 15.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s friend is a retired employee of the Indian government. Applicant 
contacts him twice a year on holidays. Applicant does not discuss work with his friend. 
(Tr. 15.) 
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States. He has approximately $600,000 in 
equity in that home. He also has retirement savings accounts in the United States. He 
estimated his net worth is approximately $780,000. He has no property, investments, or 
accounts in India. (Tr. 21-22.) 
 
 Applicant’s manager indicated Applicant has been trained in rules and 
regulations regarding international restrictions on exporting the technology with which 
he works. Applicant has been faithful in his duties to protect that proprietary information. 
Applicant is known to be a “very conscientious, honest, trustworthy person.” (AE A.) 
 
India 
 
India is the world’s largest democracy and is the world’s second most populous 
country. India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral 
parliament. (HE I.) 
 
India has a history of being involved in criminal espionage and is an active 
collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information. The most heavily targeted 
sectors include aeronautics, information systems, lasers and optics, sensors, and 
marine systems. There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and 
equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of 
delivery. Foreign government and private entities, including intelligence organizations 
and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. 
technology. (HE I.) 
 
A March 2017 Human Rights Report on India reflects that the most significant 
human rights problems in India involve police and security forces who engage in 
extrajudicial killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack 
of accountability permeates the government and security forces, creating an 
atmosphere in which human rights violations go unpunished. A number of violent 
attacks were committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. In addition, a 
number of terrorist groups operate in regions of India, which makes travel to these 
regions dangerous. (HE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, brother-in-law, and friend are citizens and residents of 
India. His cousin, also a citizen of India, is an ambassador representing India. India is 
the world’s largest democracy. But it also continues to have human rights issues, has 
been victimized by terrorist attacks, and has a history of seeking restricted dual-use 
technology, which has been illegally exported to India from the United States. This 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.1 It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), have been 
raised by the evidence.  
                                                 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant and his 
family members are vulnerable to coercion. The risk of coercion, pressure, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon that government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious problem 
in the country with crime or terrorism. In this case, there is evidence that India illegally 
targets U.S. technology; that his cousin is a ranking member of the Indian Government; 
and that there is terrorist activity in the country, which raises a security concern about 
Applicant’s relationship with his mother, sister, brother in-law, cousin, and friend. Hence, 
AG ¶ 8(a) has limited application.  
 
Applicant produced some evidence to establish AG ¶ 8(b). He has lived in the 
United States since 1979. He became a naturalized citizen in 1994. His wife and 
children are U.S. citizens. All of his assets are in the U.S. He has relinquished all claims 
on his mother’s estate in India. Based on those connections to the United States, there 
is some indication that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to the security concerns raised as a result of Applicant’s 
contacts with his mother, sister, brother-in-law, and friend in India because those 
contacts are frequent and not casual. His communications have been consistent over 
                                                                                                                                                             
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
the years, including multiple trips to India to visit family there. His contact with his cousin 
is infrequent, their last contact being two-years ago, in 2016. However, due to her role 
as an ambassador and India’s interest in technologies that Applicant works on, there is 
insufficient evidence to hold that there is little likelihood that his contact with her could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old man, who was born in India and has lived in the United 
States for about 39 years. He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1994. His 
spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and his children are natural-born U.S. citizens. He 
has significant assets in the United States. He is highly regarded at work and has held a 
security clearance since 2007 without incident. Those are facts that weigh in favor of 
granting Applicant a security clearance. However, Applicant’s ties to India outweigh 
those factors. Over the past 20 years, Applicant has maintained strong connections to 
India through his family living there. He has communicated regularly with his mother 
over the years and visited her in India. While his ongoing contacts with family members 
and his friend in India demonstrate devotion to and affection for his family, those actions 
raise security concerns and potential conflicts of interest that are not easily mitigated. 
Further, his contacts with his cousin, while infrequent, raise security concerns due to the 
high-profile nature of her position within the Indian government. Applicant failed to meet 
his burden to present sufficient evidence that it is unlikely he would will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
 
 
8 
 
 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
