 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03193 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns stemming from his alcohol-
related conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on 
October 28, 2017, and he requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 1, 2018, scheduling the hearing for February 20, 2018. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5 were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and did not submit any documents. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
submitted an email and two attachments, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-
C without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 28, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges alcohol consumption and personal conduct security concerns 
stemming from Applicant’s three alcohol-related arrests. Applicant admitted all three 
arrests but denied the personal conduct security concerns that cross-alleged these 
arrests. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2002 and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2007. From 2003 to 2011, he served first on active duty in the U.S. 
Army and then in the U.S. Army Reserve, and he was honorably discharged. Since 
2008, he has been employed full time for a DOD contractor.2  
 
 In May 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated 
(DWI). Applicant had consumed approximately 8 to 10 alcoholic beverages over the 
course of the evening. The next morning he was pulled over for speeding and failed a 
field sobriety test. Applicant was found not guilty due to lack of probable cause; 
Applicant admitted that his blood-alcohol level was measured at 0.08% and was over 
the legal limit.3 
 
 In November 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI and refusal. 
He failed a field sobriety test and refused a breathalyzer test, because he knew that he 
was over the legal limit. In February 2011, he was convicted of DWI, and the refusal 
charge was dismissed. He was fined approximately $300 and was sentenced to 
approximately 180 days in jail, of which 180 days were suspended.4  
 
 In June 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI). Applicant had consumed about one or two alcoholic beverages an hour 
over the course of about ten hours. His blood alcohol level was measured at 0.22%. In 
October 2016, he pled guilty to DUI – 2nd offense. He was sentenced to six months of 
probation, alcohol monitoring, and five days of house arrest. Applicant’s driver’s license 
was suspended from October 2016 to October 2017.5 
  
 On the advice of his criminal lawyer, Applicant participated in a drug and alcohol 
evaluation in July 2016. A licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) at a substance-abuse 
treatment facility determined that Applicant met the criteria for a substance-related 
disorder and met placement criteria for intensive outpatient treatment. He completed the 
                                                          
2 GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 20-21. 
 
3 GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 49. 
 
4 GE 1; GE 2; GE 5. 
 
5 GE 3-5; Tr. 36-37. 
 
 
3 
 
prescribed group and individual counseling, with regular urinalysis, in August 2016. The 
LCSW recommended that Applicant continue outpatient counseling on a less frequent 
basis. Applicant has not attended any further counseling since the conclusion of his 
probation in March 2017.6  
 
 Applicant’s alcohol consumption began in about 2001, when he would consume 
about 8 to 10 alcoholic beverages on the weekends. While in the Army, his alcohol 
consumption was about six to eight alcoholic beverages on the weekends. During his 
August 2013 security interview, Applicant explained that he had abstained from alcohol 
for about eight months after his November 2010 DWI arrest, and he had resumed 
consuming alcohol on a weekly to bi-weekly basis. He continued to consume alcohol to 
the point of intoxication about once or twice a year, but he had no future intent to drive 
after consuming alcohol. During his August 2017 interview, Applicant stated that he had 
abstained from alcohol for about six months following his June 2016 arrest, and he 
admitted to having experienced blackouts due to his past alcohol consumption. He 
further explained that his expenses associated with his 2016 DUI totaled approximately 
$15,000, including his daily transportation to and from work while his driver’s license 
was suspended. Applicant testified that he continued to consume alcohol about once 
every couple months. Applicant acknowledged that his consumption of alcohol has 
caused him problems; however, he did not consider himself an alcoholic. While 
employed by a DOD contractor, Applicant came to work while hung over.7 
 
 Applicant’s work performance is well regarded by his employer. Applicant 
received several awards and citations for his military service.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Response to SOR. 
 
7 GE 5; Tr. 40, 43, 59. 
 
8 AE B; AE C. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”9 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
                                                          
9 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 
988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
5 
 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
 Appellant’s alcohol consumption resulted in three criminal offenses between 
2003 and 2016. AG ¶¶ 22(a) applies. The burden thereby shifts to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigation condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence with treatment recommendations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 23(a), the first prong of this mitigating condition (“so much time has 
passed”) focuses on the recency of the conduct. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the evidence. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has 
passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” 
 
Applicant abstained from alcohol for about six months after his June 2016 arrest, 
in part to comply with the terms of his probation. In December 2016, he resumed 
consuming alcohol. Applicant’s alcohol history spans approximately 17 years and 
includes binge drinking, blackouts, and three alcohol-related arrests. During his August 
2013 security interview, Applicant acknowledged his alcohol problem and averred to 
refrain from driving while impaired. Nonetheless, he continued to drink to the point of 
intoxication and engaged in criminal conduct. He currently consumes alcohol despite 
the LCSW’s conclusion that he met the criteria for a substance-abuse disorder and 
despite significant financial consequences following his 2016 arrest.10 Notwithstanding 
Applicant’s uncorroborated claims of reduced alcohol consumption, it is simply too early 
to conclude that such problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010)(“[A] Judge may nevertheless consider 
unalleged conduct for certain limited purposes. These including assessing an applicant’s credibility, 
evaluating his evidence in mitigation, and considering the extent to which an applicant has demonstrated 
rehabilitation.”). 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has acknowledged his alcohol problem and claimed to have reduced 
his alcohol consumption. Notably, Applicant acknowledged his alcohol problem and 
contended that his alcohol problem was under control during his August 2013 security 
interview. A LCSW concluded that Applicant met the criteria for a substance abuse 
disorder, though Applicant does not know whether he was diagnosed with alcohol 
abuse or alcohol dependence. Applicant’s claims of reduced consumption are 
uncorroborated, and there is no evidence that a mental-health professional has 
concluded that Applicant’s level of alcohol consumption is acceptable. AG ¶ 23(b) does 
not apply. 
 
Similarly, without evidence that a mental health professional has concluded that 
Applicant can engage in responsible or modified consumption of alcohol, AG ¶ 23(d) 
does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol consumption culminated in three alcohol-
related criminal incidents. Despite Applicant’s claims during his August 2013 interview 
to avoid such circumstances, they recurred in June 2016. Even after the significant 
criminal and financial consequences of his 2016 DUI conviction and the conclusions of 
the LCSW, Applicant continues to consume alcohol. Applicant has not mitigated the 
alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . .  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol consumption culminated in alcohol-related criminal conduct 
on three occasions. Applicant continues to consume alcohol despite the legal and 
 
7 
 
financial consequences, his own acknowledgement of an alcohol problem, and a 
medical professional’s conclusion that Applicant met the criteria for a substance-abuse 
disorder. AG ¶ 16(d)(3) applies. 
 
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17 is potentially relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or such much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Less than 20 months had passed between Applicant’s most recent alcohol-
related criminal conduct and his February 2018 hearing. Applicant’s two most recent 
arrests are separated by about six years. Applicant consumes alcohol despite his 
admitted alcohol problem and the significant consequences he has incurred. Given his 
past relapses and his continued alcohol consumption, personal conduct security 
concerns regarding Applicant’s reliability and judgment remain.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines G and E and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in 
this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant’s work performance is well regarded by his employer, and he received 
several commendations and awards during his military service. Nonetheless, he 
continues to demonstrate poor judgment as to his alcohol consumption. There is no 
evidence that Applicant’s ongoing alcohol consumption is consistent with the 
conclusions and aftercare recommendations of a medical professional. As a result, the 
totality of the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant did not 
mitigate the alcohol consumption and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
