                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03488 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from his foreign 
family members in Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 18, 2017, Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. 
 
On November 2, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On February 1, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for February 21, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-2 and 
Administrative Notice (AN) I-II were admitted, without objection.  Applicant testified and 
submitted three documents, which I admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted an email and 
four attachments, which I admitted into evidence as AE D through H, without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 9, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns based on Applicant’s family 
members in Taiwan and the PRC. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He served his mandatory military service in the 
Taiwanese military from 1985 to 1987. He earned an associate’s degree in Taiwan in 
1987. He entered the United States in 1990, and earned master’s and doctoral degrees 
here in 1992 and 1995, respectively. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 
2007. Since July 2003, he has been employed as a data scientist for a DOD contractor. 
He has been married since 1994, and he has three children – ages 12, 15, and 21.1 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was born in the PRC and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
Applicant’s three children are all U.S. citizens by birth, and they reside with Applicant in 
the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s parents (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.b.) are citizens of and reside in Taiwan. 
Applicant’s father is a retired engineer, and his mother is a retired teacher. Applicant has 
weekly telephonic contact with his parents, and he annually provides them approximately 
$10,000 in financial support.2  
 
 Applicant’s two sisters (SOR ¶ 1.c.) are citizens of and reside in Taiwan.3 One 
sister has two children who are citizens of and reside in Taiwan. One of Applicant’s sisters 
is an engineer for a Taiwanese utility company, and the other sister is a homemaker who 
resides with and cares for Applicant’s parents. Applicant has telephonic contact with his 
sisters about quarterly to monthly.4  
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law (SOR ¶¶ 1.d.-1.e.) are citizens of and reside in the PRC. 
Both parents-in-law are retired professors, having been employed at a government-
                                            
1 GE 1-2. 
 
2 GE 1-2; Tr. 26-29. 
 
3 Applicant’s third sister is deceased. 
 
4 Tr. 22, 31-36. 
 
operated university. He has telephonic contact with his parents-in-law about every three 
months. Applicant’s sister-in-law has U.S. permanent residency, and she resides in the 
United States.5 
 
 In 2000, Applicant purchased a home, currently valued at approximately $500,000, 
in the United States. He maintains retirement, education, and savings accounts in the 
United States. Applicant does not have any foreign investments or property. 
 
 Applicant’s work performance and character are highly regarded by his current 
supervisor, former supervisor, and current co-workers. He has been awarded for his 
research and publications on multiple occasions. Applicant also mentors and volunteers 
training junior scientists in his field.6 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts concerning Taiwan: 
 The PRC seeks to unify Taiwan and mainland China as “one China” and does not 
recognize Taiwan’s independence. Tensions persist between the PRC and Taiwan over 
Taiwan’s sovereignty. The United States does not diplomatically recognize Taiwan.7  
 There have been multiple cases involving the illegal export or attempted illegal 
export of U.S. classified, restricted, and dual-use technology to Taiwan. Illegal technology 
transfers are a significant concern because foreign government entities – including 
intelligence organizations and security services – have learned to capitalize on private-
sector technology acquisitions.8 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts concerning the PRC: 
 The PRC is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority. Human rights concerns included the repression and coercion of 
organizations and individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy; torture and 
coerced confessions of prisoners; detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, 
writers, bloggers, dissidents, petitioners, and others; lack of due process; extrajudicial 
disappearances; and monitoring of communications. Citizens lacked the right to change 
their government and had limited forms of redress against the government.9  
                                            
5 GE 1-2; Tr. 23, 38-39, 48. 
 
6 AE A-H. 
 
7 AN I. 
 
8 AN I. 
 
9 AN II. 
 
 The United States faces a large and growing threat to its national security from 
PRC intelligence collection operations. Among the most serious threats are the PRC’s 
efforts at cyber and human infiltration of U.S. national security organizations. Computer 
systems, including those in the U.S. Government, are targeted by PRC-based intrusions. 
The PRC uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against U.S. 
diplomatic, economic, and defense industry sectors.10 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
                                            
10 AN II. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
“The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
[sensitive] information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.”11 The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
“An applicant with family members living in a country hostile to the U.S. has a very heavy 
burden to show that they are not a means through which the applicant can be subjected 
to coercion or exploitation.”12 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
                                            
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-12659 at 3 (May 30, 2013). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
15, 2011). 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
To establish AG ¶ 7(a), the Government must demonstrate a “heightened risk” of 
exploitation due to Applicant’s contacts with his family members in Taiwan and the PRC. 
Given the PRC’s intelligence-gathering capabilities and activities targeting the United 
States and the PRC’s intelligence activities within Taiwan, the Government has 
established the requisite “heightened risk.” Applicant’s relationships with his relatives in 
Taiwan and the PRC create a potential conflict of interest. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
None of Applicant’s family members in Taiwan is currently employed by its 
government or military; however, Applicant’s parents-in-law are employed by a PRC-
controlled academic institution. More importantly, the PRC’s intelligence activities 
requires Applicant to overcome a “very heavy burden” in mitigation. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply.  
 
Applicant maintains close relationships with his family members in Taiwan, and he 
provides significant financial support to his parents. Applicant has not rebutted the 
presumption that his relationship with his parents-in-law is not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not 
apply. 
 
Security-clearance determinations are predictive judgments as to whether an 
individual will safeguard classified information. Applicant made the United States his 
home beginning in 1990. Applicant and his wife were married in the United States, and 
all three sons were born in and live in the United States. Applicant completed his 
graduate-school education in the United States, and he has developed his entire 
professional career in the United States. Applicant mentors and trains junior scientists in 
the United States, and all of Applicant’s investments and property are in the United States. 
During his 28 years in the United States, Applicant forged longstanding professional 
relationships within the scientific community, and his professional colleagues strongly 
endorse his character and work performance. Notwithstanding Applicant’s close 
relationships with his family members in Taiwan and the PRC, Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding personal, professional, and community relationships are such that he can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies. I conclude that Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns 
triggered by his contacts with his relatives in Taiwan and the PRC. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s character, integrity, work ethic, and mentoring are highly regarded by 
his colleagues. Applicant maintains close relationships with his foreign relatives; however, 
he has forged deep and longstanding professional and personal relationships, during his 
28 years in the United States. Any conflict of interest can be expected to be resolved in 
favor of the U.S. interest. I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
