 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01962 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2017, and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and it was received by Applicant on 
October 3, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant provided a response 
to the FORM with additional documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through J. There was no objection to any of the evidence and Items 1 through 4 and AE 
A through G are admitted. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about the Lebanon. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative 
notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by source documents from 
official U.S. Government publications and those that were provided with the FORM. The 
facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He was born in Lebanon. He received a bachelor’s 
degree in Lebanon and a master’s degree in the United States. He has worked for his 
present employer since 2005. He came to the United States in 2007 and was sponsored 
by his employer, an American company that operates internationally. He was later 
sponsored for permanent residency in the U.S. by his employer. As part of his 
employment, Applicant lived in foreign countries for extended periods while working. He 
became a naturalized citizen in April 2016. He married an American citizen in 2013 and 
has a three-year-old child and an infant child both born in the U.S. He stated that his 
children are not dual citizens of Lebanon.1  
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. His mother was born in Ghana. Applicant disclosed in his 2016 security 
clearance application (SCA) that she is unemployed. His father was born in Lebanon. He 
reports his father’s occupation as self-employed at a body shop. His brother is 30 years 
old and his sister is 34 years old. He listed his brother’s employer, but not his brother’s 
occupation. It is unknown if he is married or has children. Applicant’s sister is married and 
he lists her employer as a school. It is unknown what her occupation is or her husband’s.2  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he has weekly contact with his parents and 
both siblings. He communicates by telephone and electronic media. Applicant disclosed 
that he provided his mother monthly financial support and estimated the total amount of 
support was $40,000 over eight years. He explained that this support was provided when 
he was single. It is unknown if he has provided his family in Lebanon additional support 
since he completed his SCA. As of the date of his SCA and background interview with a 
                                                          
1 Item 2; AE A, B, D, G. H. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
government investigator in October 2016, he disclosed that he visited his parents and 
siblings in Lebanon in 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015. It is unknown if his wife and 
family travel with him when he visits his family in Lebanon. It is unknown if his family in 
Lebanon has visited him in the United States.3 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant disclosed he does not have any foreign 
financial interests or real estate in Lebanon. He stated to the best of his knowledge his 
family in Lebanon are not affiliated or hold positons with any military, social, political, or 
religious groups. He said that his contact with his family is casual and intermittent and 
limited in nature. He said that he travels to see his family, and his discussions are limited 
to familial and social discussion.4  
 
 Applicant purchased a house in the United States in 2012 and makes timely 
payments on his mortgage. He provided copies of scholarships and awards he received. 
He provided financial documents showing his investments, savings, and assets in the 
United States. He provided a November 2017 summary of credit report that shows there 
is no negative information.5  
 
 Applicant provided character letters from people who know him in the community 
and work with him. He is described as a person of high character, outstanding work ethic, 
hardworking, loyal, and respected.6 Applicant stated that he is loyal to the United States.7 
 
Lebanon8 
 
 The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to 
Lebanon because of threats of terrorism, armed clashes, kidnapping, and outbreaks of 
violence near Lebanon’s borders with Syria and Israel. There is also concern of the 
possibility of grave injury or death due to terrorist attacks and bombings.   
 
 Violent extremist groups operating in Lebanon include numerous U.S. 
government–designated terrorist organizations. Some have claimed responsibility for 
suicide bombings in Lebanon. 
 
 The Lebanon government cannot guarantee protection of U.S. citizens against 
attacks of violence, which can occur any time in Lebanon. There are numerous incidents 
                                                          
3 Items 2, 3. Applicant was visiting his family in December 2013 to January 2014. It appears it was one trip 
that carried over into the new year.  
 
4 Item 1. 
 
5 AE D, E, F, I, J. 
 
6 AE C. 
 
7 Item 1; AE A. 
 
8 FORM. 
 
4 
 
 
of bombings along roads, at financial institutions and other commercial and residential 
areas that have killed and wounded a significant number of innocent people.  
 
 Kidnappings for ransom and political motives have also occurred and some are 
tied to terrorists and others to criminal organizations. The U.S. Government’s ability to 
protect and help victims is limited. The U.S. State Department considers the threat to U.S. 
Government personnel in Beirut to be sufficiently serious to require personnel to live and 
work under strict security restrictions. The United States partnered with Lebanon’s 
defense and law enforcement due to the significant internal and external terrorist threats 
in 2016. Throughout the year terrorist attacks occurred against Lebanese forces from 
renowned terrorist organizations. Hezbollah, operating in Lebanon, receives considerable 
support from Iran and continues its military role in Syria in support of the Bashar al-Assad 
regime. Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps has had a presence in Lebanon since 
the early 1980s. Terrorist groups also operate out of Lebanon’s 12 Palestinian camps.  
 
 Lebanon has significant human rights issues, which include torture and abuse by 
security forces; harsh prison and detention center conditions; limits on freedom of 
movement for refugees; lengthy pretrial detention; judiciary subject to political pressure; 
violation of a citizen’s right to privacy; some restrictions on freedom of speech, religion, 
assembly, and the press; widespread violence against women; and societal, legal, and 
economic discrimination against women.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. 
  
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to 
Lebanon because of threats by terrorist organizations and unsafe conditions, in addition 
to its inability to protect them. It also has serious concerns about many U.S. designated-
terrorist groups that operate within the country. These terrorist groups are responsible for 
numerous bombings and attacks throughout Lebanon. Border regions of Syria and Israel 
also remain a concern. Lebanon’s human rights issues are a serious concern. They 
include torture and abuse by security forces, harsh prison and detention center 
conditions, limits on freedom of movement for refugees, lengthy pretrial detention, 
judiciary subject to political pressure, violation of a citizen’s right to privacy, and some 
restrictions on freedom of speech, religion, assembly, and the press. 
 
Applicant’s father, mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. As a good son, he provided his mother financial support over the years totaling 
about $40,000. He visits his family about once a year. He has weekly contact with each 
family member by telephone or electronic media. Applicant’s family residing in Lebanon 
creates a heightened risk and a potential foreign influence concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
 
7 
 
 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s family, which includes his mother, father, brother, and sister are citizens 
and residents of Lebanon. He has weekly contact with his parents and siblings in Lebanon 
and visits them about once a year. He provided financial support to his family in Lebanon 
over the years. Applicant’s contact with his family is not casual and infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) 
does not apply. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s close relationship with his family in Lebanon. It is an 
unsafe place for most people residing there, and especially for U.S. citizens. Terrorism 
and human rights abuses are significant. Terrorist groups conduct kidnappings, 
bombings, and other attacks on innocent people. I cannot find that it is unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between his parents and 
siblings and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2016. His wife and children are citizens of 
the United States and his financial assets are located in the U.S. He is obviously a 
devoted son and brother. His brother’s occupation is unknown. Although Applicant moved 
to the United States in 2007 and worked overseas for extended periods, he only recently 
became a citizen.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s expressed loyalty to the United States and his long-
term employment. I considered the character letters, awards, and scholarships. However, 
Lebanon continues to have significant terrorist activity and human rights issues. 
Applicant’s close relationship with his family in Lebanon, his annual visits to see his family, 
and his financial support for them is commendable. His familial ties are not minimal. It is 
too great of a burden to expect him to be loyal to the interests of the United States and 
resolve any conflicts in favor of the United States over those of his parents and siblings. 
AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2016. He 
has strong family ties with his parents and siblings who are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. Applicant’s ties to the United States are outweighed by his familial obligations 
and loyalty to his family in Lebanon. It is too great a burden to expect him to resolve a 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States instead of his family. The heightened risks 
raised by familial ties in Lebanon continue to raise security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence, and are unmitigated. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
