 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01812 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Prins, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Most of Applicant’s debts occurred after a divorce and the failure of a family 
business that Applicant ran with his former wife. Applicant is resolving his debts through 
a debt resolution service and he has established a track record of payments into that plan. 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 2, 2015. 
On June 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.1  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2017. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 30, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 11. Applicant received the FORM on October 
27, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  
 
Applicant retained counsel on November 15, 2017, and submitted a response to 
the FORM on December 14, 2017. The FORM response’s three enclosures are marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. Applicant did not object to admission of Items 
1-11. The SOR and the Answer (Items 1 and 3) are the pleadings in the case. Item 2 is a 
procedural document. Items 3 through 11 and AE A through C are admitted into evidence 
without objection.  
 
 Applicant’s December 14, 2017 submission is captioned “Respondent’s Petition 
for Withdrawal in Lieu of Submission to Administrative Judge.” In the event the 
Government did not withdraw the SOR, Applicant requested a hearing. (Petition at 7) The 
file also includes an e-mail from Applicant’s counsel to the Department Counsel’s office, 
dated the same day, December 14, 2017, in which he asked that the SOR be withdrawn 
“in lieu of submitting it to an Administrative Judge based on the information presented.” 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) I) The Government interpreted this statement as a request for an 
administrative determination on the written record, without a hearing. The case was then 
assigned to the Hearing Office of the Defense Office of Hearings & Appeals (DOHA) for 
assignment to an administrative judge for a decision on the written record. 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 16, 2018. Since it seemed that 
Applicant’s counsel had on the same day both waived his client’s right to a hearing and 
also requested one, I issued an order on May 9, 2018 requesting that he clarify his client’s 
choice of forum. The same day, Applicant’s counsel confirmed that his client did not want 
a hearing but also requested time to submit additional evidence. (HE II) On May 10, 2018, 
over the Government’s objection, I reopened the record until June 1, 2018, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to do so. (HE III)  
 
On May 31, 2018, Applicant timely submitted two new documents, which were 
marked as AE D and AE E.2 On June 8, 2018, Department Counsel objected to admission 
of AE D and AE E, and offered an additional document, GE 12 (Item 12), as rebuttal 
evidence. On June 18, 2018, Applicant’s counsel objected to admission of Item 12, and 
                                                          
2 AE D is an affidavit from Applicant, dated May 31, 2018. AE E is a document from Applicant’s debt 
resolution company, reflecting the status of his payments as of May 9, 2018. Applicant’s Counsel also re-
submitted Applicant’s FORM Response, as well as AE A, AE B, and AE C. They have been included in the 
file but not re-marked, since they are duplicative of materials already submitted. 
 
 
3 
 
 
offered a new document (AE F) rebutting Item 12. AE D, AE E, AE F and Item 12 are 
admitted. The record closed on June 29, 2018.3  
 
Amendments to the SOR 
 
 With the FORM, Department Counsel included an amendment to the SOR, offered 
under ¶ E.3.13 of DOD Directive 5220.6.  
 
 The Government amended SOR ¶ 1.l to reflect that the unpaid $4,940 tax lien 
alleged was a debt owed to Applicant’s home state. (In the original SOR, the creditor was 
unidentified.) 
 
 The Government withdrew SOR ¶ 1.m, which had alleged a charged-off debt to a 
bank. In its place, the Government alleged a new subparagraph ¶ 1.m:  
 
¶ 1.m. You are indebted to [name of creditor] on a judgment entered against 
you in March 2017 in the approximate amount of $10,613.59. As of the date 
of this Amendment to [the] SOR, the judgment remains unpaid. 
 
 In his FORM response, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.l, as amended, as he believed 
the tax debt had been paid. He denied the original SOR ¶ 1.m (which was withdrawn), 
and admitted SOR ¶ 1.m, as amended.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j. He admitted SOR ¶1.k in his Answer but denied 
it in his FORM Response. As noted above, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.m, as amended, 
and denied SOR ¶ 1.l, as amended. He provided narrative explanations for each 
allegation. I have incorporated Applicant’s admissions and other statements into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make 
the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He served on active reserve with the Army National 
Guard from 1989 to 1995. He served on active duty with the U.S. Army from February 
2000 to December 2001. Since 2004, he has worked as a private investigator and process 
server. He has mostly been self-employed, with a company he says he co-owned with his 
wife. Since April 2011, he has also worked in federal law enforcement. He was granted a 
security clearance by the Defense Department in 2013. (Items 4, 5) 
 
                                                          
3 The undersigned was on leave out of the office for much of mid-June, which is why the parties received 
more time than they otherwise might have to review and respond to exhibits submitted when I reopened 
the record.  
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was married from 1997 until he and his wife separated in March 2015. 
They divorced in December 2015. (Item 9) They have three daughters, ages 12, 17, and 
20. He also has a 22-year-old son. (Item 4)  
 
 The 13 debts alleged in the SOR (as amended) total about $52,185. Almost all of 
the debts were incurred after Applicant’s divorce. Applicant’s business was also affected, 
since his former wife was a co-owner. (Item 3) Applicant stated in his Answer that he 
made his wife a 51% co-owner of the business so that she and their children would have 
financial security. Applicant states that after their divorce, his former wife “basically took 
over the company and because of her inexperience, [she] ran it into the ground.” Applicant 
was responsible for all the loans and credit cards related to the company. (Item 3 at 2) 
Applicant states that he learned about many of the debts in 2016, in the aftermath of the 
divorce. He was temporarily unemployed at the time. (AE D) Applicant experienced a 70% 
drop in income after his divorce and the failure of his business. (AE E)    
 
 In their December 2015 divorce decree, Applicant’s former wife is listed as being 
employed by a local public school district. The document gives no indication that she had 
an independent business at the time. Applicant’s employment status is listed as self-
employed. (Item 9 at 16) With the exception of the two vehicles (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), the 
general marital debts are divided equally in the divorce, with 50% responsibility to each 
party. (Item 9) But for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.k, all of the SOR debts post-date the divorce. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a charged-off debt for $12,064. It is for Applicant’s truck, which was 
repossessed after his divorce. The truck is listed in the divorce decree as Applicant’s 
property, and the related debt is his responsibility. (Item 9 at 20-21) SOR ¶ 1.b is a 
charged-off debt for $9,460. It relates to a car purchased by Applicant’s former wife in 
February 2015 (a month before they separated). It became delinquent two months later, 
in April 2015. (Item 6) Though Applicant admitted the debt, his divorce decree establishes 
that his former wife is responsible for it. (Item 9 at 21-22) SOR ¶ 1.b is therefore resolved 
for Applicant on that basis. 
 
Most of the other SOR debts are accounts that were either charged off or placed 
for collection. These debts include SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($7,415 charge off); 1.d ($2,210 in 
collection); 1.e ($1,192 in collection); 1.f ($1,144 charge off); 1.g ($966 in collection); 1.h 
($812 charge off); 1.i ($679 in collection); and 1.j ($538 in collection). Applicant stated 
that he was unable to pay these debts after the divorce and the business failure. But for 
the truck, Applicant attributes all of them to the business. When the business began 
failing, Applicant became personally liable for the debts. (FORM response at 3) 
 
In May 2017, Applicant entered into a repayment agreement with a debt resolution 
company. (Item 3) In the agreement, Applicant declared $28,180 in debts, to be paid off 
in monthly installments of $310.80 over a 60-month (five-year) period. The agreement 
 
5 
 
 
includes a service fee of 20% of the original amount of any debt settled,4 as well as 
monthly administrative and maintenance fees of $29. The company does not begin 
settlement negotiations with any of Applicant’s creditors until Applicant has accumulated 
$25% of the amount of one of his enrolled accounts. (Item 3 at 6)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.j are listed in the agreement. (Item 3 at 10) Applicant made 
his first $310 payment under the debt resolution agreement in May 2017. He has made a 
year’s worth of monthly payments since then, up through his April 2018 payment, the 
most recent one established in the record. This reflects about $3,700 of payments 
towards the accounts in the agreement. (AE E)  
 
As of November 2017, one account (SOR ¶ 1.f) was reported by the debt resolution 
company to be in active settlement. (AE C) Applicant provided no updated documentation 
reflecting that any of his other debts being negotiated by the debt resolution company 
have been paid, settled, or resolved.  
   
 The remaining SOR debts (¶¶ 1.k, 1.l and 1.m) are not listed in the debt resolution 
agreement. (Item 3, Attachment A) The status of these debts is as follows:   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k is a past-due cable bill for $242. Applicant admitted the debt in his 
Answer but noted it is 10 years old, and he believes it has been paid. He denied the debt 
in his FORM Response. An April 2017 credit report indicates that the account was opened 
and became past-due in 2012. (Item 6) This debt therefore pre-dates the divorce.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l, as amended in the Government’s FORM, is an unpaid $4,940 state tax 
lien. The lien was filed in Applicant’s home county in January 2017. It is for the period 
from December 1, 2014 through April 30, 2015. The lien is for “limited sales, excise and 
use tax.” (Item 7)  
 
 In his FORM Response, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.l, as amended. He asserted 
that the account is for past-due taxes relating to his former wife’s business. There is no 
such indication on the lien. Applicant is named on the lien, and his wife is not. The lien is 
also listed on Applicant’s credit report. (Item 6; Item 7) Applicant also believes that the 
account has been paid. He indicated that he is in contact with the tax authorities to 
ascertain the debt’s status. (Petition at 6) If necessary, he will contract with the debt 
resolution company to help him resolve the debt. (AE A at 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.m, as amended in the Government’s FORM, is an outstanding $10,613 
judgment, issued against Applicant in March 2017. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.m in his 
FORM Response. He stated that the account was for a revolving business loan used to 
finance his ex-wife’s business operations. Applicant was a co-signer and when the 
business failed, he was unable to make payments on the debt because of divorce costs, 
                                                          
4 For example, if Applicant had a $2,000 debt that was settled for $1,000, he would pay $1,400 to resolve 
it, with $400 (20% of the original amount owed) going to the debt resolution company. (Item 3 at 6) 
 
6 
 
 
the loss of the business, and his temporary unemployment. He stated that he was 
unaware of the debt because related correspondence was provided to his former wife at 
her address, and she failed to tell him about it. (AE A at 6) 
 
The judgment at SOR ¶ 1.m was issued in a court in Applicant’s home state, 
though in a different county from where he lives. Applicant is personally named on the 
judgment as a defendant. His full name and correct birth date are listed, although the 
address listed for Applicant on the judgment does not correspond to any address he 
provided on his SCA. (Item 4; Item 8)  
 
Applicant’s company is also listed on the judgment as a defendant. (Item 8) The 
address listed is the same address Applicant gave on his SCA as the address for a 
company where he worked as a process server from 2004 to 2011. (Item 4 at 12; Item 8) 
The judgment lists two names for this company defendant. Applicant listed one of those 
companies on his SCA as his employer since October 2013, though he provided a 
different address for the company on his SCA from that listed as the company’s address 
on the judgment. (Item 4 at 11; Item 8)  
 
The Government asserts that Applicant was personally served process of the 
default judgment on November 14, 2016. In support, Department Counsel offers Item 12 
as evidence that Applicant knew about the default judgment at least as of that date.5  
 
Item 12 is from a website, “[Name of county redacted].com.” Applicant’s counsel 
objects to admission of Item 12 on the grounds that it is not an official record. In support, 
he offers AE F, a document from the same website saying as much.6 He argues that Item 
GE 12 is insufficient evidence to prove that Applicant received service of process of the 
default judgment in November 2016, which he denies. As the evidentiary standard is 
relaxed in an administrative forum such as this one, GE 12 is admitted. Nevertheless, and 
more importantly, Applicant also acknowledges that he “accepted responsibility for the 
debt [SOR ¶ 1.m] and judgment.”7  
 
Applicant also asserts that “he responsibly referred it to his debt management and 
settlement company.”8 As with the tax lien at SOR ¶ 1.l, he offers no corroborating 
documentation that he has done so.  
 
                                                          
5 Department Counsel’s e-mail of June 8, 2018.  
 
6 “In any case where legal reliance on information contained in these pages is required, the official records 
of [the county] should be consulted.” (AE F) 
 
7 Applicant Counsel’s e-mail of June 18, 2018.  
 
8 Applicant Counsel’s e-mail of June 18, 2018.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to a recent budget, Applicant earns $5,000 in monthly income. He lists 
$4,896 in monthly expenses, including his $310 monthly payment to the debt resolution 
company. He has a monthly net remainder of $604. (Answer Attachment A; AE B) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”10 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
The financial considerations guideline notes several conditions that could raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f)  . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant accrued various delinquent debts after his divorce and the failure of a 
family business that he ran with his former wife. AG ¶ 19(f) does not apply to SOR ¶ 1.l, 
because it is a business tax debt, and not related to income tax, as required to apply AG 
¶ 19(f). More generally, however, AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) do apply to that debt, as well as 
to the other debts alleged.  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem, and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and  
  
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant’s debts are largely attributable to his 2015 divorce, and the failure of the 
business he ran with his now former wife. While he has begun to resolve them through 
his debt resolution agreement, the debts are ongoing. He has not established that AG ¶ 
20(a) should apply. 
 
 Applicant and his wife were in business together, and their marriage and their 
business both failed. Almost all of Applicant’s debts can be traced to these conditions, 
which were beyond his control.12 The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) is therefore established. 
Under the second prong, Applicant must establish that he acted reasonably under the 
circumstances. After he learned of the debts in 2016, in the aftermath of the divorce, 
Applicant retained a debt resolution company to begin resolving his debts. He did so in 
May 2017. The SOR was issued a month later.  
 
 It is not clear from the record that the debt resolution company has yet taken action 
with Applicant’s creditors to resolve his debts. However, Applicant has nonetheless 
established a year’s worth of payments into the agreement. He also provided a recent 
budget, which shows that his repayment plan is reasonable.  
 
 There is no documentation in the record that two of the larger debts (SOR ¶ 1.l and 
¶ 1.m), are being resolved by the debt resolution company, or otherwise. These two debts 
                                                          
12 SOR ¶ 1.k predates the divorce and the business failure, so it is an exception.  
 
10 
 
 
were not in the original SOR either at all (since the original ¶ 1.m was withdrawn) or with 
any specificity (¶1.l). Nonetheless, since the record was re-opened, Applicant had the 
opportunity to provide documentation that he had amended the debt resolution agreement 
to add them). Even so, these debts are also attributable to the business and its failure 
and are therefore mitigated by AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 There is no requirement that an applicant show that the SOR debts be paid in full, 
or that they are being paid or resolved in any particular way. All that is required is a 
repayment plan, a showing that the plan is reasonable, and a showing of steps taken 
towards implementing the plan. Here, Applicant’s budget shows that he can afford his 
repayment plan of $310 a month. He has been making regular monthly payments into the 
debt resolution plan for a year. He has therefore established a track record of steady 
payments. Applicant also signed up for the debt program before the SOR was issued, 
thereby bolstering his good faith. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) therefore apply. 
 
 The debt resolution company Applicant retained is not a “non-profit” organization, 
as they take a 20% fee out of the original debt amount for each debt they are able to 
settle. The company is also not a credit counseling service. However, Applicant’s debts 
are nonetheless being resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is therefore partially 
established. 
 
 Notwithstanding Applicant’s admission, SOR ¶ 1.b is shown in the divorce decree 
to be the responsibility of Applicant’s former wife, since it relates to her car. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to mitigate that debt. AG ¶ 20(e) is not otherwise established.  
 
 Having learned about the business-related tax lien at SOR ¶ 1.l, Applicant 
indicated that he is in contact with the authorities to ascertain what he owes. He also 
indicates that he will pay the debt. AG ¶ 20(g) is not established, as resolution 
arrangements are not yet in place.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s debts are largely attributable to 
conditions beyond his control, including his divorce and the failure of a family business 
he ran with his former wife. His repayment arrangements were delayed by his own 
employment instability. He has been in a repayment plan for a year and that plan is 
reasonable. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
       
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
