 
 1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04206 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B based upon family 
ties to the Russian Federation (Russia). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended (Exec. Or.); Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2018, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on April 2, 2018. On April 5, 2018, Applicant received a complete copy of the file of 
 
 2 
relevant material (FORM) and was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He submitted his 
response to the FORM and provided evidence on April 16, 2018. The case was assigned 
to me on June 19, 2018. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 In her FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
relevant facts about Russia. (FORM at 3 and Item 6.) The request and supporting 
documents were not admitted into the record as evidence, but are attached to the record 
as Administrative Determination Exhibits (ADX) I and II. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out below in my findings of fact.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the two SOR allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was born in Moscow in December 1957, when that city was the capital 
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR or Soviet Union). He is now 60 years 
old. Applicant served a mandatory, two-year period in the Soviet Union army. In 1986, he 
earned a bachelor’s degree at a Moscow university. He immigrated to the United States 
in January 1996 under a special refugee program. (FORM Item 5 at 3.) He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2001. In his security clearance application (SCA), 
Applicant denied that he was a dual citizen of the United States and Russia (FORM Item 
4 at 8), but he has provided no evidence to support his contention that he has formally or 
legally renounced his Russian citizenship. His Russian passport, on which he traveled to 
the United States in 1996, expired in 2000 and has not been renewed. A stamp on that 
passport reflects that he was leaving Russia permanently. (FORM Item 5 at 3.) Applicant 
considers himself to be a “proud” American citizen and “only” an American citizen. 
(Response to FORM.) 
 
 Applicant presently works for a company that is not a government contractor. He 
is being sponsored for a clearance by a defense contractor on a pre-employment basis. 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in the Ukraine. They are both deceased. His mother 
was a Ukrainian citizen, and his father was a citizen of the USSR. (FORM Item 5 at 6.) In 
or about August 1995, his father immigrated to the United States. His mother immigrated 
with Applicant at a later date. She was a naturalized U.S. citizen at the time of her death. 
His father died as a Russian citizen with a U.S. Alien Registration card. While living in the 
USSR, and later in Russia, Applicant’s father worked as a butcher. (FORM Item 5 at 6.) 
The record does not disclose whether his mother worked outside the home while living in 
Russia. Applicant has one sibling, a sister, who was born in Moscow and immigrated to 
                                                          
 
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 4) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3 
the United States sometime prior to her naturalization as a U.S. citizen in July 2000. 
(FORM Item 5 at 6.) His sister was trained as a seamstress, but is currently disabled and 
unemployed. (FORM Item 5 at 6.) 
 
Applicant has been married three times. He married his first wife, a Russian citizen, 
in 1983. They have one daughter, who was born in 1985. His first marriage ended in 
divorce in May 1995. His daughter married in 2013 and has a son. (FORM Item 5 at 10, 
as corrected in Applicant’s Response to the FORM.) The record evidence does not reflect 
whether Applicant’s daughter is presently married. When Applicant immigrated to the 
United States, his daughter stayed with her mother. (FORM Item 5 at 7.) Applicant’s first 
wife, daughter and grandson2 are all citizens and residents of Russia.  
 
 Applicant’s daughter is a real estate agent in Moscow. (FORM Item 5 at 7.) She 
lives with Applicant’s first wife in Moscow. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) His first wife is a retired 
salesperson, who worked in a Moscow clothing store. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) Applicant 
speaks with his daughter four times per month via FaceTime or Skype. (FORM Item 5 at 
7.) He also communicates with her via email. On very rare occasions, he speaks with his 
first wife when she answers his calls to his daughter. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) In October 
2012, Applicant’s daughter visited him for the first and only time in the United States for 
ten days. Applicant has provided financial support to his daughter for the benefit of his 
grandson two times per year since January 2014. (FORM Item 5 at 10.) The total amount 
of this support is $1,800. (FORM Item 5 at 10.) He has also sent her baby gifts for his 
grandson. (FORM Item 5 at 10.) He provides this support to his daughter because he is 
not able to be in Moscow to help her as the grandfather of her son. (FORM Item 5 at 10.) 
Also, he provided this support to his daughter because she was struggling financially after 
the birth of her child because she was on medical leave for three years after the birth. 
(FORM Item 5 at 10.) 
 
 Applicant divorced his first wife when she declined to emigrate with Applicant from 
Russia. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) The same month, Applicant married another Russian 
woman, who he believed would immigrate with him to the United States. (FORM Item 5 
at 5.) He did not want to emigrate from Russia without a Russian wife. (FORM Item 5 at 
5.) The day before the two of them were scheduled to leave Russia, his new wife called 
him and told him that she had decided not to emigrate. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) On January 
11, 1996, Applicant proceeded to travel as planned with his mother, who was ill. A month 
later, Applicant’s marriage to his second wife was annulled in Russia. (FORM Item 5 at 
6.) Applicant has had no contact with his second wife since he arrived in the United States. 
As of 1996, his second wife worked as a cashier in a Moscow bank. (FORM Item 5 at 6.) 
 
 Applicant remarried in the United States in 2006 to a woman who was born in the 
Ukraine and who, like Applicant, immigrated to the United States as a refugee. She 
subsequently became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She works as a case worker for a U.S. 
                                                          
2 Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, I move to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to conform to the evidence, so that the 
word “grandson” is substituted for the word “granddaughter.” With this minor change in the SOR 
allegation about the gender of Applicant’s grandchild, no additional time or opportunity to respond is 
necessary or appropriate. Motion is granted. 
 
 4 
health care insurance company. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) In his SCA, Applicant represented 
that his wife’s parents are deceased. In his Enhanced Subject Interview, he reportedly 
stated that his wife talks with her parents in the Ukraine by phone once per week. (FORM 
Item 5 at 5.) It is possible that Applicant was misunderstood by the investigator who 
conducted the interview and that he meant to communicate that when her parents were 
alive, she spoke to them weekly. According to their dates of birth provided by Applicant 
in his SCA, his wife’s parents would have been 96 and 95 years old at the time of the 
interview. Applicant’s present wife has a daughter, who is 32 years old. (FORM Item 5 at 
4, as corrected in Applicant’s Response to FORM.) Applicant did not list his stepdaughter 
in his SCA due to a misunderstanding. (FORM Item 5 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant has a friend who was born in the USSR and served with him in the Soviet 
Union Army (the Army Friend). In about 1989, the Army Friend immigrated to Israel and 
is presently residing there as a naturalized Israeli citizen. (FORM Item 5 at 8.) At that 
point, Applicant lost touch with his Army Friend until about 1999, when the friend 
contacted Applicant. (FORM Item 5 at 8.) Applicant and his Army Friend have contact 
about four times a year on special occasions. (FORM Item 5 at 8.) Applicant and his wife 
visited the Army Friend in Israel in 2014 for ten days. (FORM Item 5 at 8.) His Army Friend 
works as a technician for a semi-conductor company in Israel. (FORM Item 5 at 8.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Russia is one of the top three most 
aggressive and capable collectors of economic information and technological intelligence 
from U.S. sources. Russian military programs continue to be driven by the perception that 
the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are its principal strategic 
challenges and greatest potential threat.  
 
Russia is a leading intelligence threat to U.S. interests based upon its capabilities, 
intent, and broad operational scope. Russian intelligence services target national security 
information and proprietary information from U.S. companies and research institutions 
involved with defense, energy, finance, dual-use technology, and other areas. (FORM 
Item 6 at attachment I) Russia’s highly capable intelligence services use human 
intelligence, cyber, and other operations to collect economic information and technology 
to support Russia’s economic development and security. (FORM Item 6 at attachment II.) 
Russia’s aggressive cyber posture was evident in its efforts to influence the 2016 U.S. 
election, and the U.S. Intelligence Community assessed that only Russia’s senior–most 
officials could have authorized the 2016 U.S. election-focused data thefts and 
disclosures, based upon the scope and sensitivity of the targets. (FORM Item 6 at 
attachment I.) 
 
 Russia’s intelligence services also use non-cyberspace collection methods to 
collect economic information and technology from U.S. targets. Two trends that may 
increase Russia’s threat is that (1) many Russian immigrants with advanced technical 
skills and work for leading U.S. companies may be increasingly targeted for recruitment 
by Russian intelligence services, and (2) a greater number of Russian companies 
affiliated with the intelligence services will do business in the United States. (FORM Item 
6 at attachment II.)  
 
 5 
Russia’s human rights record is uneven, and in some areas, it is poor. The judiciary 
is not independent and is subject to manipulation by political authorities. Abuses include 
attacks on journalists, physical abuse by law enforcement officers, harsh prison 
conditions, arbitrary detention, politically motivated imprisonment, electronic surveillance 
without judicial permission, warrantless searches of residences and other premises, and 
widespread corruption in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. (FORM Item 6 
at attachment XIII.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
 6 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR sets forth two allegations under Guideline B. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that 
Applicant’s daughter and granddaughter are citizens and residents of Russia. SOR ¶ 1.b 
alleges that Applicant’s Army Friend is a citizen and resident of Israel. 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG 6, as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The evidence establishes the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
 
 7 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant has contacts with his daughter and by extension with his young 
grandson, who are citizens and residents of Russia. These contacts create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. These relationships also constitute connections to foreign persons that 
creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and Applicant’s desire to help his 
daughter and grandson by providing that information or technology. Both AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b) apply to Applicant’s relationships with his daughter and grandson. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a)  
 
With respect to Applicant’s Army Friend, who is a citizen and resident of 
Israel (SOR ¶ 1.b), AG ¶ 7(b) is established because Applicant’s Army Friend is a 
citizen and resident of Israel, which creates the same conflict of interest as that 
created by Applicant’s daughter and grandson. AG ¶ 7(a) has not been established 
by the record evidence because the Government did not submit with its FORM a 
Request for Administrative Notice with respect to Israel for the purpose of proving 
that Applicant’s contact with his Army Friend creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. The facts that the 
Applicant’s Army Friend was born in the USSR and that he was a citizen of the 
Soviet Union and then Russia before becoming a naturalized citizen and resident 
of Israel do not establish a “heightened risk” security concern under AG ¶ 7(a) 
based upon the evidence and the requested administrative notice facts presented 
by the Government. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
 
 8 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 With respect to the Government’s SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a, Applicant has not 
presented sufficient evidence to meet his burden of persuasion to mitigate the security 
concerns under any of the three mitigating conditions quoted above. Applicant’s close 
fatherly relationship with his daughter, and by extension with his grandson, who are both 
citizens and residents of Russia, preclude favorable application of AG ¶ 8(a). Based upon 
the very limited evidence presented by Applicant, I cannot reasonably conclude that it is 
“unlikely” that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his foreign family members and the interests of the United States.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant’s scant evidence does not begin to meet his burden of 
persuasion under AG ¶ 8(b) to prove that there is no conflict of interest. Applicant’s sense 
of obligation to his Russian family members is not minimal. Also, he has presented no 
material evidence of the depth of his relationships in the United States other than his 
status as a former refugee and a U.S. citizen since 2001, his long-time employment in the 
United States, his 2006 marriage to a U.S. naturalized citizen, who was born in the 
Ukraine, and his relationship with her daughter, who is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
Applicant provided no significant additional information to evidence deep and long-
standing ties to the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) has also not been established. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
an applicant’s contacts with immediate family members are not casual. ISCR Case No. 
00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant has not rebutted this presumption 
because he acknowledges that he has frequent communications with his daughter and 
provides gifts to her for his grandson. Accordingly, I conclude that he has not carried his 
burden of persuasion under AG ¶ 8(c) to establish that “there is little likelihood that [his 
communication with his daughter] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
 With respect to his Army Friend, Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to 
establish the applicability of AG ¶ 8(c) because his communication with his foreign friend 
is casual and infrequent. This creates “little likelihood that [his communication with his 
Army Friend] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(a) is partially 
established for the same reason. Applicant’s casual relationship with his Army Friend 
make it “unlikely [Applicant] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his friend and the United States. AG ¶ (8(b) is also established because the 
evidence shows that Applicant’s “sense of loyalty or obligation to his [Army Friend]” is 
sufficiently “minimal” that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed above, but other factors warrant additional comment. I have considered 
Applicant’s age and personal history as a refugee, who immigrated to the United States 
from Russia without the comfort and companionship of either of his first two wives or his 
daughter. I have also considered his choice to become an U.S. citizen five years after his 
entry into the United States. On the other hand, I have weighed heavily the fact that 
Applicant’s family members are citizens and residents of Russia. This raises the potential 
for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, exploited or subject to duress by the Russian 
government. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that his ties to the 
United States are so strong that he could successfully resist any efforts by Russian 
intelligence to exploit his relationship with his daughter and grandson by exerting pressure 
on him through his foreign relatives.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
failed to fully mitigate the security concerns raised by the circumstances of his foreign 
relatives. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1.  Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 10 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
 
