 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03207 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
        
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 On October 23, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On February 1, 2018, a notice of hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
February 20, 2018. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. Applicant testified and 
submitted three documents, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
without objection. Department Counsel submitted four documents, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
timely submitted six documents (two emails with four total attachments), which I admitted 
as AE D through I, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 9, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The security concerns alleged in the SOR are based on Applicant’s eight 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h). In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the alleged 
debts and attributed his financial delinquencies to a period of unemployment. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1995 to 
2004, when he was honorably discharged. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2003. From 
July 2006 to June 2013, he was employed as a systems engineer. He was unemployed 
from June 2013 to October 2014. Since October 2014, he has been employed full time 
as a systems engineer for a DOD contractor. He has never married, and he has no 
children.2  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, October 2015 credit report, and August 2017 credit report 
establish the eight delinquent debts, totaling approximately $26,900. These debts 
became delinquent between August 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.d.) and April 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.c.). 
Applicant has made no payments on any of the established debts.3  
 
 In about 2015, Applicant engaged the services of a debt-resolution company to 
dispute his debts and to negotiate settlements or payment plans on his behalf. After about 
eight months, Applicant ceased using this company’s services and began contacting 
some creditors himself, after the company’s efforts had yielded no results.4  
 
 Applicant admitted that he had become delinquent on some debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
and 1.d.) before his June 2013 unemployment. Prior to receiving the SOR, Applicant used 
his savings ($15,000) to purchase a home in early October 2017. He testified that while 
he was aware of his delinquent debts at the time, he prioritized re-establishing his savings 
over making any debt repayments at the time of the home purchase. Applicant also 
testified that he owed approximately $4,000 in delinquent state income taxes, and that he 
had initiated monthly payments ($200) towards that debt in February 2017.5 He provided 
no corroborating documentation of any such payments. This tax debt is not alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to his unemployment and his 
mother’s medical expenses; however, he did not provide any further information about 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-4; Tr. 21, 48. 
 
4 Tr. 32, 43. 
 
5 Tr. 26-27, 36, 47. 
 
3 
 
these medical expenses. He acknowledged that his financial delinquencies began prior 
to his unemployment and his mother’s illness.6  
 
 Applicant earned three Navy Achievement Medals and two Good Conduct Medals 
during his military service. Applicant’s character and work performance are well regarded 
by his co-workers.7 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the S`OR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
                                                          
 
6 Tr. 49. 
 
7 AE E-I. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s eight delinquent debts total approximately $29,300. These debts 
became delinquent between August 2011 and April 2015, and they remain outstanding. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
  
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant bears the burdens of production and persuasion in mitigation. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts remain. Although Applicant engaged the services of a debt-resolution 
company in 2015, there is no evidence that he undertook any debt-resolution efforts 
beyond disputing the admitted debts. There is no documentary evidence of any debt 
payments since Applicant’s employment began in October 2014. Applicant has not 
provided documentary evidence of sufficient debt-resolution efforts to remove doubts as 
to his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s period of unemployment contributed to his financial problems; 
however, Applicant incurred some delinquent debts both before (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d.) 
and after (SOR ¶ 1.c.) this period of unemployment. Furthermore, even though his debts 
are due to conditions beyond his control, Applicant must also demonstrate that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances to address his delinquent debts. Despite being 
aware of his delinquent debts and delinquent taxes, Applicant spent his savings ($15,000) 
to purchase a house in October 2017. By failing to make any debt-resolution efforts 
beyond disputing the delinquent debts, Applicant’s conduct does not reflect an adherence 
to his financial obligations. Applicant has not presented sufficient documentary evidence 
for me to conclude that he acted responsibly with respect to his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence of any credit counseling. He has not provided a monthly 
budget, and all of the alleged debts remain unaddressed. Therefore, I cannot conclude 
that his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. In 2015, 
Applicant engaged the services of a debt-resolution company to dispute his admitted 
debts. Aware that those disputes were unsuccessful, Applicant made no other debt-
resolution efforts since 2015. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant encountered circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his 
financial problems. Nonetheless, he has not demonstrated that he has acted responsibly 
in addressing his delinquent debts, all of which remain outstanding and unresolved. 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis. 
  
 Applicant’s character and work performance are highly regarded by his co-
workers. Nonetheless, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts 
beyond disputing debts Applicant had admitted. He failed to demonstrate that he acted 
responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts and adhering to his financial obligations. 
Given his burden to demonstrate financial responsibility, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.8 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 After the hearing, Applicant requested his eligibility for access to classified information be continued 
conditionally, pursuant to Appendix C of the Directive. I have considered the exceptions in Appendix C and 
have found them inapplicable in this case, particularly because there is no documentary evidence that 
Applicant is currently engaged in any debt-resolution efforts or repayment plans. 
 
