 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-02005 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that she was unable to make payments or 
otherwise resolve the debt in statement of reasons (SOR) ¶ 1.a. Financial considerations 
security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 15, 2015, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) 
On June 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992, Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 
2017. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On July 25, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she requested 
a hearing. (HE 3) On September 15, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. 
On February 18, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On March 13, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
                                         
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for April 9, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 11, 14-16; GE 1-4) On April 16, 2018, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript. Applicant provided two exhibits after her hearing, which were admitted without 
objections. (Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE B) The record closed on June 11, 2018. (Tr. 37)   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted she incurred the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b. (HE 3) She also provided mitigating information. (HE 3) Her admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 57 years old, and she is seeking employment as an investigator for 
security clearances for a government contractor. (Tr. 6-8; GE 1) In 1978, Applicant 
graduated from high school, and in 1984, she received a bachelor of arts degree with a 
major in criminal justice. (Tr. 6-7) In 2004, she received a master’s degree in 
organizational management. (Tr. 7) She has never been married, and her son is 38 years 
old. (Tr. 7) She has not served in the military. (Tr. 7) She was employed in federal law 
enforcement for 30 years, and she held an important federal law enforcement leadership 
position for seven years. (Tr. 16, 19) She retired from federal law enforcement in 2015. 
(Tr. 16, 19)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Aside from her federal law enforcement retirement, she was underemployed or 
unemployed at times after 2015. Her income after 2015 was from her federal law 
enforcement retirement ($5,600 monthly) and several other sources of income (about 
$1,200 monthly). (Tr. 20, 27) She received some financial counseling or advice before 
she retired in 2014. (Tr. 30) Applicant said her two primary delinquent debts resulted from 
helping her son and his spouse. (Tr. 16) Applicant denied that she had any non-SOR 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 26) 
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, and the record establishes the status of 
Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a credit card debt placed for collection for $8,357. Applicant 
opened the account in 2010 or 2011 to assist her sister. (Tr. 20-21) Applicant stopped 
making payments around 2012. (Tr. 21) The original creditor charged-off the debt. (Tr. 
22) Applicant provided pages 13 and 14 of her credit report, the original creditor charged-
off the debt; the balance is zero; and the activity designator indicates the debt was 
transferred or sold. (AE B) SOR ¶ 1.a does not allege a debt owed to the original creditor. 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a debt being collected by a specific collection agent. The debt is listed 
as a collection debt in her May 10, 2017 credit report. (GE 2) The debt is unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a debt resulting from an apartment lease placed for collection 
for $6,569. Around 2012 or 2013, Applicant cosigned with her son for an apartment. (Tr. 
22) Her son lost his job, and he was unable to pay his rent. (Tr. 22) Her son was evicted, 
and the apartment was damaged. (Tr. 23) Her son did not pay the debt, and the landlord 
sought payment from Applicant. (Tr. 23) Applicant’s wages were garnished. (Tr. 23) 
Applicant said she believed the garnishment was sufficient to pay the debt. (Tr. 23-24) 
Court records indicate on January 6, 2015 the judgment was paid and satisfied. (AE A)    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d allege two medical debts placed for collection for $363 and 
$182. Applicant said she was unaware of the source of the debts; she has medical 
insurance; and she did not believe she is responsible for the two debts. (Tr. 24; SOR 
response) The two medical debts do not appear on her May 10, 2017 credit report. (Tr. 
25; GE 2) These two debts are mitigated. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a debt placed for collection for $120 apparently for a ticket. 
Applicant denied responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 25-26) She denied that she owed any 
tickets. (Tr. 26) This debt does not appear on her May 10, 2017 credit report. (GE 2) The 
debt is refuted. 
 
In sum, the only delinquent debt in her May 10, 2017 credit report is the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. (GE 2) There is no evidence that she is doing anything to resolve it. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,2 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                            
2 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant presented some mitigating evidence. She was underemployed or 
unemployed at times after retiring from federal law enforcement service in 2015. She 
cosigned on a contract with her son, and he failed to comply with the contract. These are 
circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances. She does not 
receive full mitigating credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because she did not act responsibly under 
the circumstances. She received some financial counseling. I have credited Applicant 
with mitigation of all of the SOR debts, except for SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Mitigation credit is reduced for SOR ¶ 1.b, a debt placed for collection for $6,569, 
because Applicant did not voluntarily pay the debt. The creditor had to resort to garnishing 
her salary to be paid.3 She did not provide any evidence of any payments to address the 
                                            
3 Payment of a debt “though garnishment rather than a voluntary effort diminishes its mitigating 
force.” Compare ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2010) with ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 
2-3 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006) (payment of two of four debts through garnishment did not bar mitigation of 
financial considerations concerns). See also ISCR Case No. 09-05700 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011) 
(garnished payments towards delinquent tax debts is not mitigating information in light of other factors); 
ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009) (remanding the case to the administrative judge 
and stating when addressing an Internal Revenue Service garnishment, “On its face, satisfaction of a debt 
 
7 
                                         
 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a after 2012. She did not promise to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a in the 
future.4 
 
Applicant indicates that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is charged off. Eventually, the 
charged-off debt will be dropped from her credit report. “[T]hat some debts have dropped 
off his [or her] credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 
14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires removal of most negative financial 
items from a credit report seven years from the first date of delinquency or the debt 
becoming collection barred because of a state statute of limitations, whichever is longer.5 
A debts may be dropped from a credit report upon dispute when the creditor believes the 
debt is not going to be paid, the creditor fails to timely respond to a credit reporting 
company’s request for information, or when the debt has been charged off. “Mere 
evidence that debts no longer appear on credit reports is not reason to believe that they 
are not legitimate or that they have been satisfactorily resolved.” ISCR Case No. 16-
02941 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 13, 2015)).  
 
Applicant did not prove that she was unable to make any payments to the  creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.a after 2012. There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable 
to make greater progress resolving the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. There is insufficient assurance 
that this SOR debt is being resolved. Under all the circumstances, she failed to establish 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
                                            
through the involuntary establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a good-
faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.”).  
 
4 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). A promise to pay debts is given greater weight when there is a track 
record of paying other debts. 
 
5Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit 
Reporting Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-
act.pdf. 
 
8 
                                         
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old, and she is seeking employment as an investigator for 
security clearances for a government contractor. In 1984, she received a bachelor of arts 
degree with a major in criminal justice, and in 2004, she received a master’s degree in 
organizational management. She was employed in federal law enforcement for 30 years, 
and she held an important federal law enforcement leadership position for seven years. 
She retired from federal law enforcement in 2015.   
 
Applicant is credited with having a generally good credit report with a solid record 
of financial responsibility, except for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a that she admits she owes. She 
received some financial counsel and has a strong federal law enforcement employment 
record.   
 
Applicant did not provide any evidence of payments, payment plans, or other 
actions to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. She did not establish she had insufficient income 
to make any payments. Her actions show a lack of financial responsibility and judgment 
and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay 
debts, financial history, or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of her past-due 
debt, and a track record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated. 
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
