 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00316 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his financial problems. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
        
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on June 1, 2017, and he elected a 
determination with a hearing. On May 25, 2018, a notice of hearing was issued, 
scheduling the hearing for June 11, 2018. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. 
Applicant testified and submitted five documents, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through E, without objection. Department Counsel submitted four documents, 
which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, without objection. DOHA 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
received the transcript on June 19, 2018. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted 
three emails with attachments, which I admitted as AE F through X, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns based on Applicant’s 
six delinquent debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c., 
and he admitted the remaining five debts. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1994. Since 
January 2013, he has been employed full-time by a DOD contractor, where he currently 
serves as a director. There are no periods of unemployment since 2008. He was married 
in September 2005 and divorced in June 2014. He has two children, ages 6 and 11.2 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the January 2016 and February 2017 credit reports 
establish the six debts, totaling approximately $16,800. Five of the debts became 
delinquent prior to his divorce, with a small utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.f.) becoming delinquent in 
2015. In June 2018, Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., and 
1.f. Pursuant to the June 2014 divorce decree, Applicant’s ex-wife was required to pay 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant disputes his liability for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he has 
not initiated legal action to enforce the divorce decree because his ex-wife has no financial 
means to resolve the debt.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his marital separation and divorce. 
Applicant and his then-wife separated in about September 2012, when he and his two 
children moved out of the family home. Between September 2012 and June 2014, 
Applicant paid his then-wife approximately $3,500 in monthly support. Between June 
2014 and June 2018, Applicant paid his ex-wife approximately $3,100 in monthly alimony. 
Although Applicant and his ex-wife share custody of their two children, Applicant receives 
little to no financial support from his ex-wife and the children reside with him full time. 
Applicant testified that his attorney’s fees associated with his separation and divorce were 
approximately $25,000. Applicant also testified that his ex-wife was reimbursed for their 
daughter’s medical expenses (SOR ¶ 1.a.) from the insurer, but she did not use the funds 
to resolve the outstanding bill.4  
 
 In about 2015 or 2016, Applicant contacted a debt-resolution company to address 
his delinquent debts. For about a year, he participated in weekly telephonic credit 
counseling, wherein he discussed reducing his expenses and other debt-resolution 
measures. Applicant initiated contacts with at least one creditor (SOR ¶ 1.a.) to begin 
monthly payments; however, the creditor would only accept lump-sum payments. As his 
                                                          
2 GE 1, GE 2. 
 
3 AE D, E, G-K, T, X. 
 
4 Tr. 31-36, 58, 63. 
 
3 
 
children’s sole financial support, Applicant grew his savings and emergency fund prior to 
resolving his remaining debts.5  
 
 Following his marital separation, Applicant dramatically reduced his expenses, and 
his finances improved. Notwithstanding his monthly alimony payments ($3,100), 
Applicant saved over $100,000 in his 401K accounts and over $55,000 in his checking 
and savings accounts. In June 2018, both his alimony payments and his daycare costs 
($1,000 a month) ceased. As of late June 2018, Applicant’s net monthly remainder was 
approximately $5,700.6 
 
 Applicant’s longtime co-worker highly praised his character, work performance, 
and subject-matter expertise.7  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
5 Tr. 29, 54, 59. 
 
6 AE F. 
 
7 AE R. 
 
4 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had six debts that totaled approximately $16,800. These debts became 
delinquent between 2008 and 2015. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s separation and divorce were conditions beyond his control that 
contributed to his financial problems and are unlikely to recur. All except one delinquent 
debt were incurred prior to his June 2014 divorce. Beginning with his marital separation 
in September 2012, Applicant was paying substantial support (over $3,000 a month) to 
his then-wife. He maintained his support payments, while also being the sole financial 
support for his two children and saving funds to resolve his delinquent debts. He initiated 
credit counseling and debt-resolution efforts in about 2015, and he took drastic measures 
to reduce his household expenses and to grow an emergency fund. Applicant actively 
worked to resolve his delinquent debts and improve his financial situation. Five of the six 
debts have been paid, and he has significant savings to avert future financial problems. 
Applicant has a reasonable basis for disputing his liability for SOR ¶ 1.c., as the divorce 
decree assigned this debt to his ex-wife. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. 
  
Despite circumstances beyond his control, Applicant acted responsibly to improve 
his financial stability and resolve his delinquent accounts in the aftermath of his separation 
and divorce. He has taken significant steps to repay and otherwise resolve his delinquent 
debts. Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant’s character, subject-matter expertise, and work performance are highly 
regarded. Since his September 2012 marital separation, Applicant substantially 
rehabilitated his finances, while paying significant spousal support and providing sole 
support for his two children. Given his burden to demonstrate financial responsibility, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment, I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
