 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01644 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to unusual circumstances largely beyond her control, Applicant 
experienced financial difficulties. However, Applicant has resolved her financial issues 
and has mitigated the potential financial security concern. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 17, 2016. 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 20, 2017, and the case was 
assigned to me on December 14, 2017. On February 13, 2018, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
March 6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until 
March 21, 2018, to enable her to submit additional documentary evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted AX C through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2018. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old procurement engineer staff member currently employed 
by a federal contractor since January 2016. She has worked as a federal contractor since 
2008. She earned an associate’s degree in 2003, a bachelor’s degree in 2006, and a 
master’s degree in 2008. She married in 1999 and divorced in 2008. She has an adult 
daughter who is independent and a 17-year-old son for whom she provides monthly child 
support. This is her first application for a security clearance. (GX 1; Tr. 37.)  
 
The SOR alleges four charged-off student loans, owed to the same creditor, 
totaling $34,290, and a 2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant denies the charged-off 
student-loan debts and admits the bankruptcy. The student-loan debts are reflected in 
Applicant’s March 2017 and February 2016 credit bureau reports (CBR). (GX 4; GX 3.) 
Applicant’s admission is incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Beginning in 2001, through the direction and assistance of her college’s and 
university’s financial aid offices, Applicant secured multiple subsidized and unsubsidized 
student loans to finance her undergraduate and graduate degrees. After graduating in 
2008, Applicant entered various periods of student-loan repayment, deferment, and 
forbearance. (Tr. 25-28.) 
 
When Applicant divorced in 2008, her ex-husband remained in the marital home. 
The divorce decree required Applicant’s ex-husband to refinance the home, thereby 
releasing Applicant’s liability for the mortgage loan. However, this transaction never 
transpired, and Applicant defaulted on the mortgage loan in an effort to receive a 
 
3 
 
 
mortgage-loan modification. Upon learning of the default and its negative impact on her 
credit, Applicant consulted an attorney who advised Applicant to file Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. She did so in April 2011, and the bankruptcy was discharged in October 2011. 
Applicant’s student-loan creditors, including the creditor of the student loans alleged in 
the SOR, were listed as required in her bankruptcy, but the debts were not included in the 
discharged debt. (GX 5; Tr. 26.) At the time the bankruptcy was initiated, Applicant’s 
student loans were in deferment. According to her CBRs, the last activity on the SOR 
debts was October 2010. (GX 4; GX 3.)  Applicant never received any notification from 
any of her lenders that she was in default or that any of her student-loan accounts had 
been charged off. (Tr. 18.) 
 
In November 2011, Applicant consolidated all her subsidized student loans with 
monthly payments of $99, and maintained payments, deferments, or forbearances on her 
unsubsidized loans. In September 2013, she consolidated all her unsubsidized loans, 
with the same creditor as her subsidized loans, with monthly payments of $479. 
Applicant’s total student-loan debt is currently approximately $100,000, which is 
consistent with the original debt plus interest. She is current on her payments, and has 
never made a late payment to the current lender. (AX D; AX E; GX 4; Tr. 18-19; Tr. 30.) 
 
Applicant’s student loans have been sold multiple times since their originations, 
making maintaining accurate documentation of the history of the loans difficult. Applicant 
learned that four of her student-loan accounts were being reported as charged off while 
reviewing her CBR during her personal subject interview for her background investigation 
in April 2016. Following the background investigator’s advice, Applicant sent a letter to 
the SOR-creditor requesting evidence of the debts. The creditor did not respond. She 
then successively disputed the incorrect information through an Internet credit-monitoring 
organization, and the four charged-off accounts alleged in the SOR do not appear on her 
March 2018 CBRs. (AX F; Tr. 19; AX G.) Upon receiving the SOR, Applicant acquired 
records of her student loans through a national student loan database. The documents 
show no record of any delinquent accounts with the SOR creditor, and show that 
Applicant’s two consolidated student loans are current. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant has never knowingly defaulted on any of her student loans. She has 
been routinely meeting her financial obligations for many years, including her child 
support payments, does not have any current or recent delinquent accounts, and is in an 
overall strong financial position. (Tr. 37; AX D; AX E.)  She received a positive 
performance evaluation from her employer for 2017, and is a valued employee who acts 
with integrity. (AX C.) Applicant’s testimony was sincere, and she understands and is 
respectful of the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information…. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
The record evidence establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations. The following mitigating conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
6 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The unusual conditions that caused Applicant to file bankruptcy were largely 
beyond her control. Specifically, Applicant’s ex-husband did not comply with the 
requirements of the divorce decree to refinance the marital home, but instead, became 
delinquent on the mortgage-loan payments. This conduct had a negative impact on 
Applicant’s credit and, after seeking the advice of an attorney, resulted in Applicant’s filing 
bankruptcy. The charged-off entries on Applicant’s CBRs from the SOR-creditor are 
erroneous. The student-loan database lists all of Applicant’s student loans, shows that 
they are consolidated into the two accounts, and that Applicant is current on those 
accounts. Applicant contested the derogatory information incorrectly listed on her CBR 
regarding the SOR student-loan debts and the erroneous entries have been removed 
from her 2018 CBR. Applicant has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve 
his debts. Applicant is current with all her ongoing financial obligations, lives within her 
means, and her overall financial circumstances are strong. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 
20(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances.  I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked as a federal contractor for over 10 years. She is financially 
responsible. She is a highly valued employee. Her testimony was sincere and she is 
respectful of the security clearance process.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
 
7 
 
 
mitigated the potential security concerns raised by her past financial issues. Accordingly, 
I conclude she has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
