 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02470 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2017, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline 
F. The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligilibility. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on September 26, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case was assigned to this administrative 
judge on November 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing on November 27, 2017, setting the hearing for December 14, 
2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented no 
documentary evidence. The record was left open to January 2, 2018, to allow 
Applicant's to submit additional evidence. Several documents have been submitted and 
entered into evidence collectively and without objection as Exhibit A.  DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on December 28, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as described 
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old.  She has never been married, and she has two adult 
children. Applicant graduated high school and attended about three years of college. 
Applicant has been employed by a defense contractor for 12 years as an Administrative 
Specialist, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment 
in the defense sector. (Tr at 5, 22-24.)  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the SOR allegations 
were established by Applicant's credit reports, (Exhibits 3 through 6), and/or Applicant's 
admissions in her RSOR. The debts will be discussed below in the order they were 
listed on the SOR: 
 
 1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,667. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that a payment 
arrangement for this debt was made where she would pay $418.03 for 12 months 
starting on October 2017, for a total to be paid of $5,016.41.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant tried to explain that this debt was for one of her cars 
that was repossessed. Exhibit 5 shows the amount of $1,667 is overdue to this creditor, 
but it is not clear what actual amount is owed. Applicant admitted that she has not made 
any payment toward this debt. (Tr at 24-32.) No independent evidence has been 
submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
 
 1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $11,237. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that she will make 3 
monthly payments of $50 and then $180 thereafter.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that she has not made any payment toward 
this debt. (Tr at 32-33.) No independent evidence has been submitted to establish that 
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
3 
 
 
 1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $10,971. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that payment 
arrangements of $100 a month have been made.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she had offered to pay $100 a month, 
which the creditor did not accept, and she has not made any payments toward this debt.  
(Tr at 33-35.) No independent evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt 
has been resolved or reduced.    
 
 1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,487.  Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that she made 
payment arrangements of $25 a month, beginning in September, 2017.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she thought $25 a month had been 
withdrawn from her bank account by the creditor for this debt, but she had no evidence 
to establish that any money was withdrawn. (Tr at 35-36.) No independent evidence has 
been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
            
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $620. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that payment 
arrangements of $155.05 a month have been made for four months to begin in October 
2017.   
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she has not made any payments toward 
this debt.  (Tr at 36-37.) No independent evidence has been submitted to establish that 
this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $537. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that a payment 
arrangement of $363.75 has been made, and she will pay it once she locates the 
telephone equipment.   
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she has not located the equipment or 
made any payments toward this debt.  (Tr at 37-39.) No independent evidence has 
been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
  
 1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $422. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that a payment 
arrangement has been made, and when it is complete she will receive a payoff letter.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that she has made two payments of $25 each. 
(Tr at 39-40.) No independent evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt 
has been resolved or reduced. 
 
 1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $331. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that a payment 
 
4 
 
arrangement has been made, and she will pay $200 on September 29, 2017. When the 
payment is made she will receive a payoff letter.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she has made a payment of $200 toward 
this debt. (Tr at 40-41.) Post-hearing Exhibit A included a letter from the creditor of this 
debt establishing that this debt was paid in full. I find that that this debt has been 
resolved. 
  
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $229. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR.  She wrote that a payment 
arrangement has been made, and she will pay $95.50 in October and $95.50 in 
November.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she has made not made any payment 
toward this debt, because she is not sure the debt is hers. When she was asked if it 
might have been one of her children, she said she had not asked either of them. (Tr at 
41-43.) No independent evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has 
been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,696. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that this debt had been 
paid in full in the amount of $2,193, and a paid letter was attached to her RSOR.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she had paid this debt. (Tr at 43-44.) Post-
hearing Exhibit A included a letter from the creditor of this debt establishing that this 
debt was paid in full. I find that that this debt has been resolved. 
  
 Applicant explained that her delinquent debts arose in part because she helped 
her daughter when her daughter’s husband left her, and also when her daughter was 
diagnosed with cancer. She also had insufficient funds to pay for the automobiles that 
she purchased, which caused several of them to be repossessed. (Tr at 50-51.)  
 
 Applicant did submit a Post-hearing document showing that she has now 
engaged the services of a law firm to try to help her resolve her debts. (Post-hearing 
Exhibit A.) Applicant did not furnish any reason for why she waited for so many year 
after the debts became delinquent before she engaged the services of someone to help 
her resolve her debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
6 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling. 
 
  Applicant has had several delinquent debts for many years, which have not been 
resolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) in this 
case.  
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributed her delinquencies in part to her daughter’s illness and the 
dissolution of her daughter’s marriage. These are circumstances beyond her control. 
However, I do not find that she has established that she acted reasonably or 
responsibly with respect to her debts. At this time the evidence has established that only 
two of the SOR delinquent debts have been resolved.  Therefore, I do not find she has 
demonstrated that she addressed her debts in a responsible or timely manner. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. Also, since only two debts have 
been resolved or reduced, I do not find that any of the other mitigating conditions apply 
in this case. Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant or continue national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National Security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
