 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 17-00192 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Pro se 
 
July 6, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 14, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On February 21, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) (SOR subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2006.1 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer One) on March 20, 2017, and 
requested a decision be made on the written record without a hearing.  
 
On April 17, 2017, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing be held in this case. Accordingly, this case was converted to a 
hearing and assigned to me on May 9, 2017. 
 
Department Counsel submitted a proposed Amendment to the Statement of 
Reasons (Amendment) to Applicant on April 27, 2017. The Amendment contained four 
additional allegations under Guideline F (SOR subparagraphs 1.h through 1.k). Applicant 
answered the Amendment in writing (Answer Two) on May 6, 2017. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 27, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on June 12, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 24, 2017.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through M, which were also 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 1, 2017. Applicant requested that the record 
remain open for the receipt of additional exhibits. He submitted Applicant Exhibit N on 
September 20, 2017, which was admitted without objection, and the record closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 33 years old, married for the second time, and has no children. He is 
seeking national security eligibility for a security clearance for the first time.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a history of having past-due debts. Therefore he is potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answers, Applicant admitted all eleven allegations in the SOR and 
Amendment with explanations. He also submitted additional evidence to support his 
request for a finding of national security eligibility. The SOR alleges that Applicant had 
$23,622 in past-due indebtedness. This included a second mortgage that was past due, 
as well as additional consumer debt. The debts were incurred from approximately 2008 
to 2013, during Applicant’s first marriage, because Applicant and his then wife 
overextended themselves financially. These debts eventually became past due in the 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006; as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
2013-2015 timeframe, when Applicant was in the midst of obtaining a divorce from his ex-
wife. The existence and amounts of these debts was confirmed by admissions in 
Applicant’s Answers; in a Report of Investigation (ROI) prepared by an investigator with 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) setting forth the results of an interview with 
Applicant on September 21, 2016; and credit reports of Applicant dated January 15, 2016; 
January 5, 2017; and April 4, 2017. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5; Tr. 22-23.) 
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for the debts set forth in the SOR as part of his 
divorce decree from his first wife. He did this in order to avoid paying her spousal support. 
Applicant stopped making payments on all the debts in the SOR around the time he 
separated from his ex-wife. He has not made payments since then on any of the debts in 
the SOR. Applicant’s divorce was final on December 28, 2015. (Applicant Exhibits G and 
H; Tr. 23-24, 43-44.) 
 
 In order to assist Applicant in resolving his debts he retained a law firm in May 
2016. The retainer documents with this law firm are found at pages 5-9 of Applicant 
Exhibit N. The debts in allegations 1.c, d, f, and g are specifically set forth in those 
documents. 
 
 On August 1, 2017, more than a year later, an attorney for the law firm provided a 
letter to the Applicant. In that letter the attorney states, “Listed below are the accounts 
reflecting inaccurately or erroneously with the major credit reporting agencies which our 
firm will dispute on your behalf and attempt to correct or permanently delete.” The letter 
references the creditors in allegations 1.a, b, c, d, f, g, h, i, j, and k of the SOR. However, 
it is noted that the letter does not state that the law firm, or this specific lawyer, has actually 
done anything to validate or resolve Applicant’s debts during the prior fourteen months. 
Applicant testified that he was very disappointed with the level of communication he had 
with this law firm. (Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. 40-41, 46-49.) 
 
 He further testified: 
 
The initial retainer document stated that they would negotiate with the 
creditors and either get it dissolved or make a payment plan, but since they 
have been working on it, I have not received a single status update as far 
as who they’ve talked to, what they’ve done, or anything. (Tr. 49-50.)  
 
 After the hearing, Applicant obtained another letter from the law firm. This letter 
also does not set forth the work the law firm has done for the Applicant, if any. Rather, it 
required Applicant to specifically authorize the law firm in writing to correspond with 
outside parties about their work. (Applicant Exhibit N at 33-34.) 
 
 The current status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he was indebted for a past-due second mortgage debt 
in the amount of $4,250. Applicant believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. 
 
 
4 
 
 
There is no evidence that happened. The two most recent credit reports in the record, 
both dated June 28, 2017, and provided by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past 
due and owing. This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibits C and D: Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that a house he owned with his ex-wife was foreclosed 
upon. After Applicant and his ex-wife separated in 2013 and moved across the country 
they were unable to maintain payments on this house. The evidence in the record 
indicates that the foreclosure occurred in 2015, and that Applicant has no continuing 
financial obligation on this debt. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 
24-30.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $7,641 for a charged-off consumer debt. 
Applicant believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that 
happened. The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, 
and provided by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt 
is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 32-37.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $3,725 for a charged-off automobile loan. 
The vehicle was repossessed and sold in approximately May 2014. This debt was 
forgiven by the creditor and an IRS Form 1099 was provided to Applicant showing the 
entire amount of the debt was forgiven. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit B; Tr. 37-
38.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $3,251 to a bank for a past-due debt. 
Government Exhibits 3 and 4 state, “Consumer disputes this account information.” This 
debt is not shown in Applicant Exhibits C and D, the two most recent credit reports. This 
allegation is found for Applicant because the record shows that he has disputed it, and it 
is unclear whether he still owes the debt. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,502 for a charged-off computer debt. 
Applicant believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that 
happened. The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, 
and provided by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt 
is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 42.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $724 for a past-due debt. Applicant 
believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that happened. 
The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, and provided 
by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt is not resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibits C, D, E, and F; Tr. 43.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $338 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that happened. 
The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, and provided 
 
 
5 
 
 
by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt is not resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $648 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that happened. 
Government Exhibit 3, a credit report dated April 4, 2017, continues to show this debt as 
charged off. Applicant Exhibits C and D do not show this debt. However, as stated, 
Applicant admits not paying any of the past-due debts in the SOR. Based on the available 
record, I cannot find that this debt has been resolved. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $861 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that happened. 
The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, and provided 
by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt is not resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $682 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
believed that the law firm would dispute this debt. There is no evidence that happened. 
The two most recent credit reports in the record, both dated June 28, 2017, and provided 
by Applicant, continue to show this debt as past due and owing. This debt is not resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant is remarried. Applicant’s wife and her parents bought a house for him 
and his wife using their credit, not Applicant’s. Applicant makes the payments on this 
house. He testified that his current financial situation is stable. He makes a sufficient 
income, is able to maintain his household without problems, and the most recent credit 
report in the record shows no new delinquent accounts. (Applicant Exhibits I, J, K, L, and 
M; Tr. 50-53, 60-65.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is a respected and successful employee. A Government employee, who 
works with Applicant, submitted a very laudatory letter of reference. He stated, 
“[Applicant] is a trusted member of our team and has shown only great dedication to the 
. . . mission.” He has also received documentary plaudits from superiors and customers. 
(Applicant Exhibit N at 22-32.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a foreclosure, a past-due second mortgage debt, as well as other 
past-due debts. All of the debts had been due and owing since 2013. Both of these 
conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
8 
 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not mitigated all of the allegations in the SOR. As stated, 
subparagraph 1.d is found for Applicant as that debt was forgiven. In addition, the 
foreclosure of Applicant’s house was the direct result of his divorce. Accordingly, 
subparagraph 1.b is also found for Applicant. 
 
Applicant stopped paying the remainder of the debts when he separated from his 
ex-wife in 2013, and has not made any payments since then. He did retain a law firm to 
help him repair his credit. However, he did not submit sufficient evidence to show that the 
law firm has done anything to assist him in resolving his debts. In fact, Applicant was 
unable to state what actions the law firm has taken on his behalf, if any. While the divorce 
had an impact on his ability to resolve his debts, the fact remains that hiring a law firm 
that appears to have done nothing in over a year does not show he has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. The mere fact a debt does not appear on a credit report does 
not mean it is resolved, especially when Applicant admits not paying it. None of the cited 
mitigating conditions have application in this case with regard to Applicant’s unresolved 
debts. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Applicant was unable to show that he has acted 
responsibly with regard to his debt issues, many of which have remained unresolved for 
several years. Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant=s 
present suitability for national security eligibility, and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national 
security eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
