 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02625 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines C and B, 
foreign preference and foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference and Guideline B, foreign influence. 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on October 11, 2017. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 19, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 5, 2018, with a hearing date of March 21, 2018. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Government’s request to take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iran, and attachments, was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) II and 
its exhibit list was marked as a HE I. Applicant testified and called one witness, but 
offered no documents. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 28, 2018.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant did not object and the request was granted. 
The request was not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as HE II. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline C, the SOR alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, Applicant received his 
U.S. citizenship in March 1993 and later that month he left for Iran where he resided 
and sought employment. The SOR alleged from 1993 to March 2007, Applicant resided 
outside the United States (in Iran for over five years) and only spent approximately five 
months in the United States. Under Guideline B, the SOR further alleged in ¶¶ 2.a 
through 2.i, Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Iran; two brothers are citizens and 
residents of Iran (one brother works for the ministry of energy and the other for the 
ministry of communication); one brother is a dual U.S.-Iranian citizen residing in Iran; 
three sisters are residents and citizens of Iran; a brother-in-law and two sisters-in-law 
are citizens and residents of Iran; two friends are citizens of Iran and one is a resident of 
Iran. The SOR also alleged Applicant sent approximately $5,000 to his sister in Iran 
between 2010 and 2014. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the SOR allegations, except for 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.f, and 2.h, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He was born in Iran in 1957. He relocated to the United 
States in 1986. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1993. He received his master’s 
degree in 1989 from a U.S. university. His wife is a dual U.S.-Iranian citizen. His two 
children, ages 21 and 24, are also dual U.S.-Iranian citizen. Their dual citizenship is 
based upon their heritage. According to Applicant, they have not exercised their Iranian 
citizenship rights. He owns a home in the United States, which is valued at 
 
3 
 
 
approximately $600,000 with his equity amounting to approximately $250,000. He 
estimated his net worth at $300,000. He has never held a security clearance.1   
 
 From 2012 to 2017, Applicant possessed an Iranian passport, in addition to his 
U.S. passport, which he obtained in 2013. From 1991 to 2014, Applicant used his 
Iranian passport to enter Iran on 11 occasions. Between 1993 and 2008, Applicant 
spent approximately five months in the United States. The rest of the time he was 
residing in either Iran or Kuwait. He explained that he was in these locations so that he 
could be near his ill mother (living in Iran) and he was able to secure employment in 
both locations. He claims he was last in Iran in either 2014 or 2015. He has no future 
plans to visit Iran.2 
 
 Applicant has the following relatives and friends who are citizens and residents of 
Iran:  
 
 1. Applicant’s three brothers (B1, B2, B3). B1 passed away. B2 is retired from the 
ministry of communication. Applicant communicates with B2 every few months and on 
holidays. B3 is a dual U.S.-Iranian citizen residing in Iran. B3 works in the information 
technology field. He last lived in the United States “a few years ago.” Applicant does not 
provide financial support to his brothers. He has quarterly contact with B3.3 
 
 2. Applicant’s mother-in-law (ML). Applicant’s ML visits and stays with him on a 
regular basis. After her visits to Applicant’s home, she returns to Iran. She does not 
work outside the home.4 
 
 3. Applicant’s three sisters (S1, S2, S3). None of Applicant’s three sisters work 
outside the home. Applicant provided $5,000 of financial assistance to S3 because her 
husband passed away and she was left to support six children. He has not provided any 
other financial support to his sisters. He has quarterly contact with his sisters.5  
 
 4. Applicant’s two sisters-in-law (SL1, SL2) and one brother-in-law (BL). SL1 is a 
university instructor, currently residing in China. SL2 is a homemaker. BL is an 
accountant. Applicant does not provide any financial support for these in-laws. He has 
monthly contact with his sister-in-laws and yearly contact with BL.6 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 17-18, 23-25, 28; GE 1-3. 
 
2 Tr. at 17, 28, 47-50; GE 1-2. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-20, 37, 45-47; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-22; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 20-21, 39, 42; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 32-33, 40, 42; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 5. Applicant’s two friends (F1, F2). Both friends are from Applicant’s college 
days. F1 is a contractor. Applicant has not had contact with him in at least six months. 
F2 is not an Iranian citizen or resident. He is a Swedish citizen and resident. He has 
yearly contact with F2.7 
Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran)   
Iran has been designated by the U.S. State Department as a State Sponsor of 
Terrorism since 1984. It remains the most prominent state sponsor of terrorism, 
providing financial aid, advanced weapons and tactics, and direction to militant and 
terrorist groups across the Middle East. It cultivates operatives across the globe as a 
contingency to enable potential terrorist attacks. 
Iran uses terrorist groups to implement foreign policy goals, provide cover for 
intelligence operations, and create instability in the Middle East. It remains an enduring 
threat to U.S. national interests. Iran and its primary terrorism partners pose a persistent 
threat to the United States and its partners worldwide. The U.S. Government does not 
have diplomatic ties or consular relations with Iran. The Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens not to travel to Iran due to the risk of arbitrary arrest and detention. 
Iran continued to leverage cyber espionage, propaganda, and attacks to support 
its security priorities, influence events and foreign perceptions, and counter threats-
including against U.S. allies in the region. The U.S. Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) has identified several countries, including Iran as posing a significant cyber threat 
against the United States. The DNI specifically noted that Iran will continue to penetrate 
U.S. and allied networks for espionage and to position itself for potential cyber-attacks. 
There is also concern that Iran will expand its influence in the region and will develop 
military capabilities that threaten U.S. forces. 
In 2015, the Visa Waiver Program was amended. Under the amendment, citizens 
of Iran, Iraq, Sudan, and Syria are ineligible to travel or be admitted to the United 
States. The exclusion of these countries from waiver eligibility reflects that the presence 
of an individual in that country increases the likelihood that the individual is a credible 
threat to the national security of the United States, that a foreign terrorist organization 
has a significant presence in the country, or that the country is a safe haven for 
terrorists. 
Iran has a poor human rights record. There are severe restrictions on civil 
liberties, including freedom of assembly, association, speech, religion, and the press. 
Other problems include abuse of due process combined with the use of capital 
punishment for crimes that do not meet requirements for due process, as well as cruel, 
inhuman, or degrading treatment and punishment; and disregard for the physical 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 43-44; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
integrity of persons, whom authorities arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or 
killed. There are numerous other human rights problems in Iran.8 
Policies 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
8 HE II. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
  AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about “foreign preference” as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
  
 (d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
 (1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military organization; 
and 
 
 (2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. 
national security interests. 
 
 Applicant’s extensive time living and working in Iran and Kuwait after gaining 
U.S. citizenship constitutes participating in foreign activities. AG ¶ 10(d) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 11 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
 (a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
 (f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk. 
 
 Applicant’s close relationship with Iran over the years presents a concern that is 
in conflict with U.S. security interests. Applicant was a U.S. citizen during the 15-year 
period he spent in either Iran or Kuwait. Iran poses a high national security risk. Neither 
of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
ML, B2, B3, S1-S3, BL, SL1-SL2, and F1 are citizens of Iran. All except for SL1 
are also residents of Iran. Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism and a country with a poor 
human rights record. It is one of the world’s most aggressive nations in conducting 
cyber-attacks against U.S. interests. Because of Iran’s posture in these areas, and 
Applicant’s relatives’ connection to Iran, there exists a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. The same situation also 
creates a potential conflict of interest for Applicant. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been 
 
8 
 
 
raised by the evidence. Applicant’s connection to F2, who is a resident and citizen of 
Sweden, has little security significance, thus alleviating any heightened risk or potential 
conflict of interest. SOR ¶ 1.h is resolved in Applicant’s favor.    
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest.  
 
 Based upon Iran’s status as a state sponsor of terrorism, its poor human rights 
record, and its cyber-attacks on U.S. interests, the evidence does not support that it is 
unlikely that Applicant could be placed in a position to choose between the interests of 
his family in Iran and those of the United States. Additionally, his relatives’ presence in 
Iran places Applicant in a susceptible position. Although Applicant has ties to the United 
States, he spent approximately 15 years outside the United States after becoming a 
U.S. citizen. Many of those years he spent working and living in Iran. It is difficult to 
determine based upon the evidence that he has a deep and longstanding relationship 
with the United States such that he would resolve all conflicts in favor of the United 
States. As stated above, the protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration and any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security. I am unable 
to find either of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable. Despite the presence of 
some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the significant security concerns that exist.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism, has a bad human rights record, and conducts 
cyber-attacks aimed at the United States. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. Applicant has not overcome the vulnerability to 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, and duress created by his relatives living in Iran and his 
15-year residency and employment in Iran.  
 
 Applicant has done nothing to question his loyalty and devotion to this country. 
However, he has simply been unable to overcome the heavy burden of showing that he 
is not subject to influence by Iran. His vulnerability to foreign pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress remains a concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign preference or the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   2.h:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph   2.i:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
10 
 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
