 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-01964 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. 
While the events at issue occurred over a 20-year period, they are also not recent, as 
the most recent incident occurred four years ago. Applicant acknowledged his 
wrongdoing, accepted the consequences of his behavior, and participated in 
appropriate work-related educational programs to prevent recurrence. His security-
significant behavior is unlikely to recur. He established that it is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security that he be granted access to classified information. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in February 2016, in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry. (GE 1) On August 15, 2017, 
following a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
 
2 
 
 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 12, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. On March 23, 2018, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 24, 2018. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but did not 
submit any exhibits. I left the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted five documents, 
which were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, and admitted without 
objection.1 The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 3, 2018. The record closed on May 
15, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.e). His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He and his wife have been married since 1990. They 
have two grown children. Applicant has a high school diploma. With limited exception, 
he has been employed in the defense industry, at a naval shipyard, since 1980. He has 
had a security clearance since the early 1980s. (Tr. 11, 22-26; 47; GE 1) 
 
Applicant worked for a large defense contractor from 1980 until July 2014, when 
he was terminated following an allegation of sexual harassment. (SOR ¶ 1.a) He was 
then unemployed until September 2014, when he began working for his current 
employer, another defense contractor at the shipyard. (GE 1) 
 
Applicant reported his termination on his 2016 SCA, and discussed the 
circumstances in his background interview. (GE 1 at 10; GE 2). Applicant became 
friends with a female co-worker who worked for another contractor at the shipyard. They 
would sometimes greet each other with hugs, and an occasional kiss on the cheek or 
neck. (Tr. 38-39; GE 2 at 2-3) Applicant testified he would speak with this particular co-
worker when he saw her in the workplace, they would visit each other at their respective 
work sites, and they had a flirtatious relationship. (Tr. 38)  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 AE A is a recommendation letter from Applicant’s supervisor. AE B (Drug-Free Workplace) and AE C 
(Sexual Harassment) are Certificates of Completion from September 2014. AE D and AE E are 
Applicant’s Performance Reviews, from February 2017 and January 2016, respectively.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that the last time he saw the woman,   
 
I asked her if she needed help adjusting her bra. And she didn’t say 
anything, so I walked to her, and I did, I made a motion to her, like this, on 
her shirt. And I thought everything was okay.2 
 
Applicant testified that he later learned that the woman was upset by what he did, 
and that she had accused him of groping her. He was initially suspended for three to 
five days without pay. When he returned to work, in July 2014, he was told he was 
being terminated. (Tr. 24; GE 2 at 3) Applicant acknowledged touching the woman as 
he had described, but denied that he had groped her. (Tr. 39) 
 
During his background interview, Applicant disclosed a previous allegation of 
sexual harassment, in 1995, and that he had been suspended from work without pay for 
four months as a result. (SOR ¶ 1.e) Applicant testified that at the time, he played on a 
basketball team at work. The coach of the team (the complainant) would often “check” 
or guard him closely during practices. He testified that, “a couple of times, just 
coincidentally, I guess, [she] had kept hitting me in my private parts.” (Tr. 27) This 
happened “on the court. Her hands, twice, in practice made contact with my private 
parts.” (Tr. 27) Applicant also testified that he was unsure if such contact was 
“incidental, or purposely, but it happened.” (Tr. 28)  
 
In his background interview, Applicant stated that he and the woman had a 
consensual sexual relationship. Applicant ended the relationship because he wanted to 
remain married to his wife. The woman filed a sexual harassment complaint against 
him. At hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he and the woman had engaged in 
flirtation and touching in the workplace, but he denied that they ever became sexually 
involved. (Tr. 26, 28, 37-38, 41-42)  
 
Applicant had no further issues with workplace sexual harassment until July 
2014. (Tr. 38) He testified that he had promised himself after the first incident in 1995 
that it would never happen again. He said the 2014 incident “came out of nowhere.” He 
said it was “another flirting-type thing and I let my guards down.” (Tr. 38)  
 
Applicant said that his wife was aware of the sexual harassment incidents, and 
he acknowledged that they had caused problems in his marriage. He described his 
current relationship with women at work as “distant.” He no longer hugs or kisses 
female co-workers. (Tr. 38-39) 
 
On or about January 1, 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with one count 
of misdemeanor domestic assault. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant disclosed the arrest on his 
SCA. (GE 1 at 31) According to his interview, Applicant had been out very late the night 
before, and his wife “gave him a hard time” about it when he got home. Applicant felt 
that she was “in his face” and he pushed her. Applicant’s wife called the police and he 
                                                          
2 Tr. 23-24.  
 
4 
 
 
was arrested. He spent several hours in a holding cell and was released. Applicant was 
later ordered to complete a 26-week anger-management program, which he did. The 
record does not indicate a disposition of the charge. Applicant has had no further 
criminal charges. (Tr. 28) SOR ¶ 1.d is the only SOR allegation supported by evidence 
from a source other than Applicant himself.  
 
Applicant also disclosed on his 2016 SCA that in July 2010, within the previous 
seven years, he used cocaine one time while at a party. He also disclosed that his use 
of cocaine occurred while he possessed a security clearance. (GE 1 at 32-33)  
 
Applicant had a few beers at the party. He wanted to see what it was like to try 
illegal drugs, and to see what it was people liked about it. The day after the party, 
Applicant got sick and went to the hospital. He said trying cocaine was a “bad 
experience” and acknowledged that he made a bad decision. He had not used cocaine 
or any other illegal drug before, and has not done so since. He attributed his one-time 
drug use to a midlife crisis. (Tr. 28-29, 34-35)  Applicant acknowledged being aware that 
he was subject to drug testing at work, at least if he got hurt on the job. (Tr. 34)  
 
Applicant did not inform anyone at work that he had used cocaine, and did not 
think he had an affirmative duty to do so. He reported his drug use on his SCA because 
he was asked about it, and he knew he was “supposed to tell the truth.” (Tr. 29-32)  
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c that Applicant had failed to report his 
cocaine use to his employer’s security office, “as required.”  Notwithstanding Applicant’s 
admission to SOR ¶ 1.c, as alleged, the Government did not produce evidence that 
Applicant in fact had an affirmative duty to do so. Though the allegation was not 
withdrawn, Department Counsel conceded at hearing that SOR ¶ 1.c was not a security 
concern, especially since Applicant disclosed his drug use on his SCA. (Tr. 52-56) 
 
Applicant expressed remorse during his testimony for his actions, including 
engaging in sexual harassment and for using cocaine. (Tr. 52-53) After the hearing, he 
submitted certificates of completion for workplace training courses he attended in 
September 2014 (the month he began working for his current employer). He provided 
certificates related to “Drug-Free Workplace” training and a class on “Sexual 
Harassment – Promoting Appropriate Behavior.” (AE B; AE C) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor for the last two years regards him as an exceptional 
worker, and as a valuable and dependable team member. Applicant gets along with 
others and adheres to all rules and regulations at his job. (AE A) Applicant is rated in his 
performance reviews as an employee who exceeds expectations. He is a reliable, 
experienced worker with a high level of expertise. He is regarded as having a high level 
of integrity. He is well respected by peers and superiors. (AE D; AE E) 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
 
                     (2) any disruptive . . . or inappropriate behavior;  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and  
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Applicant associated with individuals involved in criminal activity when he went to 
a party and used cocaine.  AG ¶ 16(g) applies. More generally, Applicant’s cocaine use 
including while possessing a security clearance; his 1998 domestic violence arrest; and 
his two instances of sexual harassment, leading to a lengthy suspension from work (in 
1995); and 19 years later (in 2014) to a termination by a longtime employer, are all 
instances of poor judgment and lack of impulse control that call into question his overall 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant’s actions satisfy the general personal 
conduct security concern (AG ¶ 15) as well as the “catch-all” disqualifying conditions of 
AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d)(2) and (3).  
 
7 
 
 
As noted above, the record evidence did not establish that Applicant had, or 
knew whether he had, an affirmative duty to disclose his 2010 cocaine use to his 
employer’s security office. The Government therefore correctly conceded that SOR ¶ 
1.c was not a security concern. SOR ¶ 1.c is therefore found for Applicant.  
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations.   
 
 Following an allegation of sexual harassment in 1995, Applicant was suspended 
from work for several months while the matter was investigated. After a similar incident 
in 2014, he was fired. That ended Applicant’s 24-year career with that employer. Given 
the impact on Applicant’s career, and the seriousness with which his employer treated 
these two incidents, they cannot be considered minor. However, the fact that they 
occurred almost 20 years apart suggests that they are isolated incidents, rather than 
pervasive conduct. Applicant also participated in a work-related sexual harassment 
awareness and prevention program when he began his new job in September 2014. He 
acknowledged his wrongdoing towards female co-workers and has taken steps to 
maintain appropriate, professional distance from women in the workplace. Given what 
has already happened to Applicant’s career as a result of his actions, he is unlikely to 
risk further negative impact on his career by engaging in similar conduct again.  
 
 Applicant had one altercation with his wife 20 years ago which led to a domestic 
violence arrest. He subsequently completed a lengthy court-ordered domestic-violence 
program. He and his wife remain married, and no further domestic offenses or incidents 
are indicated.  
  
 Applicant used cocaine on one occasion, in 2010. He did so while holding a 
security clearance. Given his full maturity and his longtime status as a cleared 
employee of a defense contractor at a naval shipyard, this was a serious error in 
judgment. However, there is nothing to indicate that this was anything but a one-time 
incident. Applicant regretted his actions immediately (particularly when he became quite 
 
8 
 
 
ill). He participated in a drug-free workplace program in 2014, and has a better 
understanding that any illegal drug use is incompatible with his position and career. 
There is no indication that he has engaged in similar conduct before or since. AG ¶ 
16(g) applies.  
 
 Applicant is also credited with candidly disclosing and discussing all the SOR 
allegations at issue. He disclosed his 2014 termination, his 2010 drug use (with a 
clearance) and his 1998 arrest, as required, on his SCA. He voluntarily, and 
appropriately, disclosed his 1995 sexual harassment incident to the interviewing agent. 
This also weighs in his favor, and adds to the credibility of Applicant’s testimony and his 
expressions of remorse. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply to mitigate the SOR allegations in 
this case.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I have also considered the total pattern 
of Applicant’s behavior and poor judgment, not just in a piecemeal fashion as a series of 
unrelated incidents.4 While the events at issue occurred over a 20-year period, they are 
also not recent, as the most recent incident occurred four years ago. Applicant also 
acknowledged his wrongdoing, accepted the consequences of his behavior and 
participated in appropriate work-related educational programs to prevent recurrence. 
His security-significant behavior is unlikely to recur. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
                                                          
4 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-22563 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (regarding the need to avoid a 
piecemeal analysis). 
 
9 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
