 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01135 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which were effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after 
that date.1  
 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 23, 2017 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to another administrative judge on August 16, 2017, and 
reassigned it me on February 21, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 13, 
2018, setting the hearing for April 18, 2018. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not offer any exhibits into evidence. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 26, 2018. The record remained open until May 21, 2018, to give 
Applicant an opportunity to provide documents. He timely submitted a document that is 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel did not object to the document, 
and it is admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in June 
2010 and enlisted in the Navy in 2010. He was an E-5 when he was honorably discharged 
in October 2014. He held a security clearance while serving. After being discharged, 
Applicant was unemployed until January 2016 when he started a position with a defense 
contractor. In March 2016, he submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In it, he 
disclosed that he had used marijuana. (Tr. 14-16; GE 3) 
 
 Applicant started using marijuana in October 2006, while in high school. He used 
it about once a week with friends on weekends until March 2010. Late in his senior year, 
he was disciplined for smoking marijuana. (Tr. 19; GE 3; Answer) He did not use 
marijuana while serving in the military between 2010 and 2014, and did not use it while 
possessing a security clearance. (Tr. 31-34)  
 
 While unemployed after leaving the Navy in October 2014, Applicant resumed 
smoking marijuana until January 2016, when he obtained his current position. He used it 
once or twice a week with his roommate or other friends during that period of 
unemployment. After leaving the regimented life of military service, he chose to smoke 
marijuana again in order to experience a freer lifestyle. He noted that marijuana is legal 
in his state, but it is no longer part of his lifestyle. (Tr. 24-28)  
 
 Applicant stated in his 2016 SCA he may use marijuana in the future if he were 
unemployed again because it is legal in his state. (Tr. 27) In response to a question about 
his intent to use marijuana in the future, he testified that he will not use it because “it’s 
really of no interest to me.” (Tr. 28, 30) He understood the security concerns related to its 
usage and his employer’s policy prohibiting its use. He participated in a random drug 
screening before he started his position. The results were negative. He knows he is 
subject to random screenings at work. (Tr. 20-22, 28-29)  
 
 Applicant has changed his life. He has a new group of friends who are focused on 
their lives and employment. Occasionally, he sees at sports events some people with 
whom he used marijuana. Although they sometimes smoke it in his presence, they are 
 
 
 
 
3 
aware that he no longer uses it. (Tr. 35-36) He has not participated in substance abuse 
treatment, but stopped using it through his determination. (Tr. 34-35)     
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from his supervisor. He stated that Applicant is an 
excellent employee and complimented him regarding his reliability. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
 
 
 
 
4 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the security concern involving drug involvement and substance 
misuse as follows: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern. Two may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
Applicant admitted that he illegally used marijuana from October 2006 to March 
2010 while a minor in high school. He used marijuana from October 2014 to January 2016 
while unemployed in his home state where it is not against state law. However, that usage 
was in violation of federal law. He also expressed an intent to use it again if he became 
unemployed. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.   
 
Conditions that could mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns are provided in AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 The last time Applicant used marijuana was in January 2016, prior to starting 
employment and after passing a drug screening. He is aware of his employer’s anti-drug 
policy. That previous usage, along with his illegal high school usage, do not cast doubt 
on his current trustworthiness. His early drug abuse occurred when he was immature and 
underage. His subsequent usage after leaving the Navy was not against state law. The 
evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
Since starting employment with a defense contractor, Applicant has not used 
marijuana. He infrequently associates with some friends who use marijuana; however, 
they are aware that he no longer uses it. He emphasized that he has no intention to use 
marijuana while holding a security clearance or working for a federal contractor. He 
understands any use would be a violation of federal law, but not necessarily state law, 
depending on where he lives. The evidence established mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(b)(1), 
(2), and (3). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
After observing Applicant’s demeanor and listening to his testimony, I found him to 
be candid and honest. He disclosed his prior marijuana use in his 2016 SCA. He 
understands the ramifications that smoking marijuana has had and could have in future 
employment, regardless of its legality in his home state. Given those facts, a 
complimentary letter from his employer, and the fact that he voluntarily stopped using 
marijuana while in the Navy and when he obtained a defense contractor position, I do not 
believe that he will engage in similar conduct in the future. Overall, the evidence no longer 
raises doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
                
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
