 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )   ADP Case No. 17-01353 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Guideline B (foreign influence) trustworthiness concerns 
relating to his connections to his family in Iraq. His support of U.S. forces in Iraq and 
family connections to the United States provide strong mitigation. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On March 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2)    
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue eligibility 
for a public trust position for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge. (HE 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth trustworthiness concerns arising under 
Guideline B. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On July 7, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. (HE 
3) On September 11, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On February 16, 
2018, the case was assigned to me. On April 3, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for April 18, 2018. (HE 1) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. (Transcript (Tr.) 4) Applicant waived his right 
to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 13-14)  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
nine exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 16-21; GE 1-2; 
AE A-AE I) On May 1, 2018, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence trustworthiness concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Iraq. (Tr. 
17) Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq, 
and I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 17) Department Counsel and Applicant 
indicated they had no objection to me taking administrative notice of facts from the U.S. 
Department of State website concerning Iraq.2 Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-
02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). Portions of the Department Counsel’s request are 
quoted without quotation marks and footnotes in the Iraq section of this decision, infra. 
The first two paragraphs are from the State Department website U.S. Relations with Iraq 
Fact Sheet, and the remainder is from Department Counsel’s administrative notice 
request. (Tr. 19-20) 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 The first two paragraphs in the Iraq section of this decision are verbatim from the U.S. Department 
of State website, “U.S. Relations With Iraq Fact Sheet,” Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs (Apr. 28, 2017), 
https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/6804.htm. Statements about the United States’ relationship with Iraq from 
the Department of State are admissible. See ISCR Case No. 02-00318 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2004). 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations. Applicant also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old, and he has been employed by the same government 
contractor since 2015 in a specialized hospital unit. (Tr. 6, 28; GE 1) He was born in Iraq. 
(GE A) In 1991, he graduated from high school in Iraq. (Tr. 5) In 1996, he received a 
bachelor’s degree in agriculture engineering in Iraq. (Tr. 6) In 2018, he received a 
master’s degree in engineering and cyber security in the United States. (Tr. 6) He served 
in the Iraqi military from 1996 to 1998. (Tr. 7) He was a low-ranking enlisted soldier, and 
his duties involved administrative work. (Tr. 7, 29) From 2004 to 2006, Applicant served 
with U.S. forces in Iraq as an interpreter. (Tr. 6) In 1999, he married, and his two children 
are ages 15 and 16. (Tr. 8) In 2017, he divorced. (Tr. 8) His former spouse lives in the 
United States and is a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 8)   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
In 2008, Applicant emigrated from Iraq to the United States under the Special 
Immigrant Visa for Iraqi Translators Program. (Tr. 24; AE C) In 2013, he became a U.S. 
citizen. (Tr. 24) When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the 
United States. He did not use his Iraqi passport after he came to the United States in 
2008. (Tr. 27) He gave his Iraqi passport to his security manager in 2014, and it expired 
in 2015. (AE I)  
 
When Applicant came to the United States, he brought his spouse and two children 
with him. (Tr. 24) In 2014, he received a U.S. passport, and the only passport that he 
possesses is his U.S. passport. (Tr. 26) From 2008 to present, he traveled to Iraq twice, 
in 2015 and 2018. (Tr. 40; GE 1) His trip in 2015 was to begin the transfer process for his 
ownership in the land he owned in Iraq, and his trip in 2018 was because his family was 
having a memorial service for his father. (Tr. 40; AE B) He informed his security office 
that he was traveling to Iraq. (Tr. 40) He does not intend to travel to Iraq for many years. 
(Tr. 40) His children attend high school in the United States. (Tr. 43) 
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother are citizens and residents of Iraq. (SOR 
response ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c) He communicates with his mother about once a month. 
(Tr. 32) His brother and sister and their families live with Applicant’s mother. (Tr. 34, 37) 
He communicates with his brother about once a month. (Tr. 35) He has not communicated 
with his sister for about two years. (Tr. 34) Applicant’s father lived in the United States in 
the 1980s, and he received a Ph.D. in the United States. (Tr. 33) Applicant’s father and 
brother worked for the United States as linguists. (Tr. 33) His father passed away in 2015. 
(Tr. 33) One of his brothers lives in the United States. (Tr. 35) 
                                            
3 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names of 
other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain 
more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR alleges Applicant jointly owns real estate in Iraq of an approximate value 
of $180,000. (SOR ¶ 1.d) In March 2016, Applicant transferred his interest in the property 
in Iraq to his brother, who was already a co-owner of the property. (Tr. 37) The transfer 
is documented in the land records in Iraq. (Tr. 23; AE A; AE G; AE H) He is unsure whether 
his brother will retain the property. (Tr. 37) He does not own any property or have any 
bank accounts in Iraq. (Tr. 42) He has refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
In 2013, Applicant sponsoring his brother, and his brother’s family to emigrate from 
Iraq to the United States. (Tr. 38; SOR ¶ 1.e) Some of the military officers that supported 
Applicant’s immigration supported his brother. (Tr. 38) The sponsoring process for his 
brother may not be complete for several years. (Tr. 38) He is willing to withdraw his 
sponsorship of his brother if continuing it will adversely affect his application for a public 
trust position. (Tr. 38) His sister would like to come to the United States too, if that is 
possible. (Tr. 39) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant served with U.S. forces for 20 months and with Multi-National Forces, 
Iraq for 19 months. (AE C) A Navy commander indicated Applicant “was the most highly 
skilled and dedicated of the interpreters with whom he served.” (AE C; AE D) When 
Applicant served with U.S. forces in Iraq, he was shot twice in the leg and once in the 
shoulder. (Tr. 44) Once a U.S. patrol rescued him from insurgents who were shooting at 
him. (Tr. 45)  
 
A retired rear admiral served with Applicant in Iraq and has stayed in touch with 
him. The retired flag officer said: 
 
under the most dangerous of circumstances in an active combat 
environment, [Applicant’s] loyalty and allegiance to the troops he was 
supporting was not diminished by the severe risks faced by his family at that 
time. And now, as a U.S. citizen, I have no reason to doubt his loyalty to our 
Country would remain steadfast, despite the danger his relatives may face 
in Iraq.  
 
(AE C) A retired Navy commander and a Navy Reserve commander who have known 
Applicant for 13 years and served with him in Iraq, lauded Appellant’s contributions to our 
forces in Iraq, dedication, diligence, and trustworthiness. (AE D; AE E)  
 
An adjunct professor knows Applicant as a student, and they have a personal 
relationship. (AE F) The adjunct professor described Applicant as dedicated, articulate, 
talented, intelligent, and trustworthy. 
 
Iraq 
 
The U.S. Mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership with 
Iraq and the Iraqi people. The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq marked 
a milestone in our relationship as Iraq continues to develop as a sovereign, stable, and 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
self-reliant country. Iraq is now a key partner for the U.S. in the region as well as a voice 
of moderation and democracy in the Middle East. Iraq has functioning government 
institutions including an active legislature, is playing an increasingly constructive role in 
the region, and has a bright economic future as oil revenues surpass pre-Saddam 
production levels with continued rapid growth to come. The U.S. maintains vigorous and 
broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and security issues in 
accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement. 
 
The Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) between Iraq and the U.S. provides 
the basis for the U.S.-Iraq bilateral relationship. It covers the range of bilateral issues 
including political relations and diplomacy, defense and security, trade and finance, 
energy, judicial and law enforcement issues, services, science, culture, education, and 
environment. Efforts to implement the SFA are overseen by the Higher Coordinating 
Committee and several Joint Coordination Committees, which meet periodically. 
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at high risk for 
kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The U.S. 
Government considers the potential threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq to be 
serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is limited given the security environment. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and 
attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur in many areas of the country, 
including Baghdad. Methods of attack have included explosively formed penetrators 
(EFPs), magnetic IEDs placed on vehicles, human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines placed 
on or concealed near roads, mortars and rockets, and shootings using various direct fire 
weapons. Such attacks may take place in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Iraq witnessed continued terrorist activity in 2016, primarily as a result of the 
actions of ISIL. In 2016, ISIL remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, maintaining a 
formidable force in Syria, including a large number of foreign terrorist fighters. ISIL’s 
capacity and territorial control in Iraq has dramatically eroded in the past two years. 
Although the government of Iraq made significant progress in its campaign to retake 
occupied territory from ISIL, there remained a security vacuum in parts of Iraq.  
 
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that 
severe human rights problems were widespread. Sectarian hostility, widespread 
corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of government and society weakened 
the government's authority and worsened effective human rights protections. Iraqi 
Security Forces, members of the Federal Police, and the Peshmerga committed some 
human rights violations, and there continued to be reports of Popular Mobilization Forces 
killing, torturing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. ISIL committed the overwhelming 
majority of serious human rights abuses, including attacks against: civilians, (particularly 
Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL); members of other religious and ethnic minorities; 
women; and children. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Observers also reported other significant human rights-related problems: harsh 
and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities; arbitrary arrest and 
lengthy pretrial detention . . . denial of fair public trial; insufficient judicial institutional 
capacity; ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; arbitrary 
interference with privacy and homes; child soldiers; limits on freedom of expression, 
including press freedoms; violence against and harassment of journalists; undue 
censorship; social, religious, and political restrictions in academic and cultural matters; 
limits on freedoms of peaceful assembly and association; limits on religious freedom due 
to violence by extremist groups; restrictions on freedom of movement; refugee and 
internally displaced persons (IDP) abuse; both forced IDP returns and preventing IDPs 
from returning home; discrimination against and societal abuse of women and ethnic, 
religious, and racial minorities, including exclusion from decision-making roles; trafficking 
in persons; societal discrimination and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons; seizure of property without due process; and 
limitations on worker rights. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance [or a public trust position].” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access 
to classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. See 
Id. at 527.  
 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance [or access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant 
has frequent contacts4 with his mother and brother living in Iraq. He has sponsored his 
brother, and his brother’s family to immigrate to the United States. Applicant is bound to 
his family in Iraq by mutual affection.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security [or trustworthiness] eligibility. Direct or 
objective evidence of nexus is not required.”  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. 
June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
There are safety issues for residents of Iraq primarily because of terrorists 
operating in Iraq. The mere possession of close family ties with relatives or in-laws living 
in Iraq is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant 
or his or her spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign 
country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 08-
02864 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (discussing problematic visits of applicant’s father 
to Iran).5  
  
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members, and this presumption includes in-laws. 
ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 05-00939 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
The in-law presumption concerning foreign influence is not relevant here because 
Applicant is divorced, and he has no spouse.   
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more constitutes “frequent 
contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every 
four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
5 In accordance with “well established DoD policy [Applicant and his family’s] religious affiliation 
play[ed] no part” in this decision. ISCR Case No. 08-06795 at 6 n. 3 (App. Bd. May 25, 2012). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for Guideline B cases, “the nature of the 
foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government are 
among the important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence 
and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. The 
country’s human rights record is another important consideration.” ISCR Case No. 16-
02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017)). 
Another important consideration is the nature of a nation’s government’s relationship with 
the United States. These factors are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members living in that country are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement.  
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law including 
widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a 
substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq with 
the United States, and the situation in Iraq places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with any family member living in Iraq or 
visiting Iraq does not pose a trustworthiness or security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist a relative living in or visiting Iraq.6  
Guideline B security or trustworthiness concerns are not limited to countries hostile 
to the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified [and sensitive] information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case 
No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. See ISCR Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 (App. Bd. Oct. 
27, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2004)) (discussing 
Taiwan). 
                                            
6 The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 03-24933, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 346 at *20-*21 n. 18 (App. 
Bd. 2005), explained how relatives in a foreign country have a security significance: 
 
The issue under Guideline B is not whether an applicant’s immediate family members in a 
foreign country are of interest to a foreign power based on their prominence or personal 
situation. Rather, the issue is whether an applicant’s ties and contacts with immediate 
family members in a foreign country raise security [or trustworthiness] concerns because 
those ties and contacts create a potential vulnerability that a foreign power could seek to 
exploit in an effort to get unauthorized access to U.S. classified [or sensitive] information 
that an applicant -- not the applicant’s immediate family members -- has by virtue of a 
security clearance [or public trust position]. A person may be vulnerable to influence or 
pressure exerted on, or through, the person’s immediate family members -- regardless of 
whether the person’s family members are prominent or not. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists from 
Iraq seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or 
his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as 
capable state intelligence services, and Iraq, like many countries, has a problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s family in Iraq “could be a means through which Applicant comes to 
the attention of those who seek U.S. information or technology and who would attempt to 
exert coercion upon him.” ADP Case No. 14-01655 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 3 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015)).  
Applicant’s relationships with relatives who may be living in Iraq or visiting Iraq 
create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists could place pressure on his family 
in Iraq in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise sensitive information. These 
relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s relationships with family in Iraq and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
[or eligibility for a public trust position], there is a strong presumption against 
the grant or maintenance of a security clearance [or access to sensitive 
information]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents evidence 
raising security [or trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in [such] decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. 
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
[or sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States. He immigrated to the 
United States in 2008, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2013. His two children are citizens 
and residents of the United States. He earned his master’s degree in the United States. 
He is employed in the United States. He took an oath of allegiance to the United States. 
 
Applicant has important connections to Iraq. He lived most of his life in the Iraq, 
and only ten years in the United States. His mother and two siblings are citizens and 
residents of Iraq. He has frequent contacts with his mother and brother in Iraq. He traveled 
to Iraq twice in the last 10 years. Once was to divest his ownership of his land in Iraq. 
Applicant is bound to his family in Iraq by mutual affection.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family in Iraq. His family 
in Iraq continues to be at risk primarily from terrorists. Applicant’s potential access to 
sensitive information could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in or visiting Iraq. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections with his family in Iraq raise serious trustworthiness 
concerns because of Iraq’s problems with terrorists and insurgents. Balanced against this 
concern are his connections to the United States, which include six factors: (1) his U.S. 
citizenship; (2) his U.S. employment; (3) his children are citizens and residents of the 
United States; (4) he is a resident of the United States who only visited Iraq twice in the 
last 10 years; (5) his oath of allegiance to the United States; and (6) his service in support 
of U.S. forces in Iraq. AG ¶ 8(b) applies, and Guideline B trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated.  
 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance or access to sensitive information by 
considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The 
administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant access to a 
public trust position and access to sensitive information “must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person 
concept. My comments under Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old, and he has been employed by the same government 
contractor since 2015 in a specialized hospital unit. In 1996, he received a bachelor’s 
degree in agriculture engineering in Iraq, and in 2018, he received a master’s degree in 
engineering and cyber security in the United States. From 2004 to 2006, Applicant served 
with U.S. forces in Iraq as an interpreter.   
 
Applicant has frequent contacts with his family in Iraq. His relationships with 
citizens and residents of Iraq raise important foreign influence security concerns, and they 
must be balanced against his connections to the United States.      
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, or cultural advisor for several years in 
Iraq. He worked for U.S. government contractors. Applicant provided character 
references from personnel, who served with him in a U.S. designated combat zone 
including from a retired two-star admiral and two Navy commanders. He made 
contributions to the U.S. military at personal risk. He risked his life as part of his duties on 
behalf of the U.S. combat forces in Iraq. He was shot three times while serving in support 
of U.S. forces. All these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent 
group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
His past honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards mitigating of foreign 
influence security or trustworthiness concerns. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant of security clearance and commenting “Applicant has 
served as a translator and as a cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
diffusing tensions and facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put 
his life in danger on at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in 
Afghanistan.”). 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.7 Iraq is a dangerous place because of violence 
from terrorists and insurgents. These entities continue to threaten the Iraq Government, 
the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and 
assist the United States. The Iraqi Government does not fully comply with the rule of law 
or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Iraqi Governments are 
allies in the war on terrorism. The security, economic, and political situations in Iraq have 
improved in the past three years.      
 
The six factors listed in the previous section are important connections of Applicant 
to the United States, and they are sufficient to overcome concerns about his connections 
to Iraq. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, the Directive, and the AGs, 
to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Applicant mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
   
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
