 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03022 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse, and personal 
conduct security concerns. National security eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On September 12, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 27, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 14, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice 
 
 
 
 
2 
of Hearing on March 13, 2018, setting the hearing for April 16, 2018. Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified but did not offer any exhibits into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 24, 2018. The record remained open until 
May 14, 2018, to give Applicant an opportunity to provide documents. He timely submitted 
performance evaluations for years 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017, which I marked as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, B, C, and D. Department Counsel did not object to the 
documents, and they are admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and has been married for 20 years. He and his wife have 
two children, ages 12 and 19 years old. In 1998, he earned a degree in engineering and 
began working for his current employer, a federal contractor. His wife also works as an 
engineer for a different employer. He coaches middle and high school sports. (Tr. 14-18) 
In November 2015, he submitted a security clearance application for re-investigation. He 
was initially granted a security clearance in 2005. (Tr. 8, 24; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in 1995 with friends while in college. He used it 
approximately a dozen times from then until he graduated in 1998. Prior to starting 
employment in 1998, he underwent drug testing in accordance with his company’s no-
drug use policy. He has not been drug tested since starting his job. (Tr. 19-21) 
  
 In April 2005, Applicant submitted his first security clearance application (SCA-1). 
In Section 27, inquiring about illegal drug use, he disclosed that within the past seven 
years, he used marijuana one time in about July or August 2000. He stated he was on a 
weekend reunion with former college friends with whom he previously used marijuana at 
the time. He has not seen any of those friends for the past ten or more years. (Tr. 21-24; 
GE 2) 
 
 In November 2015, Applicant submitted a second security clearance application 
(SCA-2) for re-investigation. In Section 23, inquiring about illegal drug use within the past 
seven years, he disclosed that he used marijuana two or three times during one week, in 
either 2012 or 2013. (GE 1) He said he was on an annual week-long vacation with a group 
of friends and their family members when he used it. He acknowledged he had a security 
clearance at the time. He has not used marijuana since that week. (Tr. 24-29, 31)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he did not disclose his 2012 or 2013 usage in another 
question in Section 23 of SCA-2 that inquired: “Have you ever illegally used or otherwise 
been involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance 
other than previously listed.” (GE 2) He interpreted this question as inquiring whether he 
had used an illegal drug while holding a clearance at any time other than he previously 
disclosed in the SCA-2. (Tr. 25-26) In his response to the SOR, he denied that he 
deliberately withheld requested information from the government. (Answer) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 In response to another question in Section 23 of SCA-2, which inquired into 
Applicant’s intention to use illegal substances in the future, he wrote: “Possibly will smoke 
or be exposed to marijuana in the future, especially now that it is legal in [state]. Use 
would be occasional as noted above [less than] 1 time per year.” (GE 1) At the time he 
wrote that he did not understand that while using marijuana was not a state crime, it 
remained a federal crime, which prohibited him from using it while working for a federal 
contractor. He does not intend to use marijuana again while holding a clearance and 
would sign a statement regarding his intention. He no longer has friends that use 
marijuana and has not been present in situations where it is being smoked. It is not part 
of his lifestyle. (Tr. 29-33) 
  
 Applicant submitted performance evaluations for 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017. His 
2014 and 2015 summary evaluations document that he “exceeds expectations.” (AE A, 
B) His 2016 and 2017 summary evaluations note some new responsibilities and rate him 
as “met expectations.” (AE C, D) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the security concern involving drug involvement and substance 
misuse as follows: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern. Two may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana in 2000 with college friends, and during 
a vacation in either 2012 or 2013. He worked for a federal contractor and held a security 
clearance in 2012 and 2013. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Conditions that could mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns are provided in AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
The last time Applicant used marijuana was during a week-long vacation in either 
2012 or 2013, five or six years ago. That previous usage does not cast doubt on his 
current trustworthiness. The evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a). He 
acknowledged his mistake. He no longer associates with people who use marijuana and 
is not in situations where it is present. Although he did not sign a statement that he intends 
to abstain from all illegal drugs in the future, he clearly emphasized that he has no 
intention to use marijuana while holding a security clearance or working for a federal 
contractor regardless of state laws. The evidence established mitigation under AG ¶¶ 
26(b)(1), (2), and (3). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
 
 
 
 
6 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
Under this guideline, the SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose in his SCA-2 that he used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant 
denied that he intentionally falsified his SCA-2 when he answered, “No,” to that question. 
He explained he misunderstood the question and believed he had disclosed the 
requested information in a previous question in the same section. After listening to his 
testimony and reviewing the pertinent language in Section 23 regarding illegal drug use 
while possessing a security clearance, I find Applicant’s explanation is credible. This 
allegation is found in his favor.  
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana while holding a position with a federal contractor 
and a security clearance. That conduct creates a potential vulnerability to exploitation as 
it is the type of conduct, which, if known, in certain communities could affect his 
professional standing. The evidence established the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 
16(e)(1). Applicant was aware of his employer’s policy regarding the illegal use of drugs 
while working, having participated in a drug screening at the time of his employment. AG 
¶ 16(f) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two may 
potentially apply: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 17(c) for the reasons articulated 
concerning AG ¶ 26(a) above. Although Applicant has not participated in structured 
counseling for drug issues, he acknowledged his mistake when he used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance and exhibited sincere remorse over his use of marijuana 
while working for a federal contractor. He fully understands the adverse ramifications 
future drug use would have on his employment. He no longer associates with others who 
use marijuana, and he is committed to not using it again, regardless of its availability and 
the circumstances within his state. He is aware that similar conduct could adversely affect 
his employment, such that it is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(d) applies.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
After observing Applicant’s demeanor and listening to his testimony, I found him to 
be candid and honest. He displayed remorse over his misconduct and the ramifications it 
has had in his life. Given those facts and the positive performance evaluations from his 
employer, I do not believe that he will engage in similar conduct in the future. Overall, the 
evidence no longer raises doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.c:        For Applicant 
 
     Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
    
                           Subparagraph 2.a:        For Applicant 
              Subparagraph 2.b:        For Applicant 
         
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
