 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01072 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, in accordance with the Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raised security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 13, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 10, 2018. The hearing was 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection (Tr. 16, 54.), and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I for 
Administrative Notice. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called three witnesses. 
Applicant presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through W, all of which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 19, 
2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran). Department Counsel provided 
a seven-page summary of the facts, supported by eight Government documents, 
identified as HE 1. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s request. Hence, I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the Government administrative notice request. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute and are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., and 1.b. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He immigrated to 
the United States 44 years ago, at the age of 18, to pursue his education. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1979, a master’s degree in 1983, and a second master’s degree in 
1988. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2000. He is married to a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He has two U.S.-born adult children, who are both U.S. residents. He has 
worked for his employer for seven years as a software developer. He has held a 
security clearance since 2006.2 (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE M; AE N; AE O; AE P; Tr. 36-41, 
44, 47-51, 67.) 
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident on Iran. He is an 89-year-old retired 
officer in the Iranian Army. He worked in “food management” for the Iranian Army and 
achieved the rank of Colonel. He retired in 1985. He is supported by a pension he 
receives from the Iranian government. Applicant’s mother is deceased. Applicant 
resumed communications with his father in approximately 2015, after a long period of 
estrangement. He speaks to his father by phone on a monthly basis to discuss his 
health and news events. Applicant last saw his father in person in 2000, when he 
traveled to Iran for ten days. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 39, 41, 52-57.) 
 
 Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents in Iran. He speaks to 
them by phone once or twice per year, on holidays. One is a homemaker and one is 
retired from work in a laboratory. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 41, 57-59.) 
                                                          
2 Similar foreign influence security concerns regarding his parents and sisters were previously adjudicated 
and his clearance was granted in ISCR Case No. 04-12732 (April 24, 2007.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant did not return to Iran for his mother’s funeral and does not intend to 
travel to Iran in the future. He inherited a share in his mother’s estate, but Applicant 
signed it over to his father. He is not interested in inheriting any properties from his 
father and would transfer any potential inheritance to his siblings. (Tr. 60-62, 72-73.) 
 
 Applicant has no property or bank accounts in Iran. He does not send financial 
support to his relatives in Iran. (Tr. 42.) 
 
 Applicant’s net worth is estimated at two million dollars. He owns his home, with 
no mortgage. He has multiple retirement and investment accounts. His wife is employed 
as a lab scientist and earns approximately $130,000 per year. He has extended family 
in the U.S. including a grandchild. His younger brother also resides in the United States, 
as do his parents-in-law and brother-in-law. Applicant communicates with his brother on 
a weekly basis. (AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE Q; AE R; AE S; AE T; 
AE U; AE V; AE W; Tr. 43-44, 63, 66, 69-70.) 
 
 Applicant presented multiple witnesses and reference letters that attest to his 
exemplary work product and trustworthiness. Applicant is known to handle classified 
materials in accordance with prescribed policy and is a rule-follower. His work 
performance evaluations reflect that he meets or exceeds expectations. (AE B; AE C; 
Tr. 21-35.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding the Iran. Iran has 
been designated as a state sponsor of terrorism since 1984. It supports various terrorist 
organizations operating throughout the Middle East and the world. The U.S. 
Government has imposed sanctions on Iran due to its nuclear program, sponsorship of 
terrorism, and poor human rights record. Iran engages in cyber espionage, propaganda, 
and attacks to support its security priorities against the United States and its allies. The 
U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to Iran, which 
include the risk of arbitrary detention on charges including espionage and posing a 
threat to national security. Significant human rights abuses and restrictions on civil 
liberties include restrictions of freedoms of assemble, association, speech, religion, and 
press; and the use of capital punishment for crimes without due process. (HE I.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
5 
 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
  Applicant has ongoing and commendable familial connections with his father, 
and sisters who are citizens and residents of Iran. There is a potential heightened risk 
associated with these family members relating to the human rights abuses pervasive in 
Iran. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant expressed deep longstanding ties to his chosen country, the United 
States. All of Applicant’s assets are located in the United States and he does not plan to 
return to Iran. While he has resumed communications with his elderly father and speaks 
infrequently to his sisters, he and his wife are entrenched in their local community and 
 
6 
 
are proud to be raising their children and grandchild as a U.S. citizen. All of his assets 
are here and he has relinquished any claim to inherit property in Iran. He has extended 
family in the United States and has close bonds of affection to them. Applicant has held 
a security clearance since 2006, without incident. He can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. The above condition fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant has the unqualified support of 
those who know him and have observed his work performance. Furthermore, he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his 
longstanding emotional and financial ties here. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
