 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02183 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guidelines related to her history of excessive indebtedness and gambling. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 25, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on September 20, 2017. She initially 
requested a decision based on the written record, but Department Counsel timely 
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on December 18, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 23, 2018. The Government 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on January 18, 2018. The record was left open for the receipt of additional evidence until 
February 23, 2018. Applicant timely submitted AE C, which was admitted without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She is a college graduate. She has worked for her current 
employer, a government contractor, since June 2004. Prior to 2004, she worked in 
accounting. She is single and has no children. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 20-23.) 
 
 In SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on four accounts 
in the approximate amount of $35,688. Those accounts include a delinquent mortgage 
and several credit card debts. SOR ¶ 1.e alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in July 2016. Each of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d are included 
in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. SOR ¶ 1.f alleged that Applicant’s on-line gambling 
contributed to her stated financial delinquencies. She admitted all of the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f.  
 
Applicant’s sister passed away in May 2013. For the last four and a half years, she 
has been grieving the loss of her sister, “and it led [her] to a lot of bad decisions with [her] 
finances.” (Tr. 19.) She developed a gambling addiction. She engaged in “gambling, 
drinking, smoking, over indulgence of food and shopping” to help manage her grief. (GE 
2; Tr. 24-25.) In 2015, Applicant lost approximately $2,000 gambling. Her gambling losses 
increased to about $1,000 every six weeks in 2017. (GE 3; Tr. 25.) She also spent beyond 
her means. (Tr. 26.) 
 
In May 2015, Applicant stopped paying all of her bills, including those alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. She spent her income on shopping, gambling, alcohol, trips, and 
restaurants. (Tr. 29.) In May 2016, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Her Chapter 
13 bankruptcy plan was confirmed in December 2016. She is on a 60-month repayment 
plan, and claimed to be current on her payments. She provided no documents regarding 
the status of her repayments. Despite filing bankruptcy, she did not change her spending 
habits. She continued to gamble. (Tr. 29-35.) 
 
In January 2018, Applicant sought online help for her gambling addiction. She has 
attended one on-line meeting and called a gambling anonymous hotline. She has also 
contacted a grief hotline. She last gambled six days prior to the hearing, after seeking 
help by attending that on-line meeting. (Tr. 26-28, 35-37.)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant performs well at work. Her performance evaluation from 2018 reflects 
that she “significantly exceeds” many of the criteria used to measure her performance. 
(AE C.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to fund 
gambling or pay gambling debts. 
 
 Applicant stopped paying her debts in 2015, so that she could fund her gambling 
habit. She filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2016, but has continued to gamble. She 
provided no proof that she is current on her bankruptcy repayment plan. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
5 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. She continues to gamble, despite filing 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to manage her delinquent accounts. She has not demonstrated 
that future financial problems are unlikely to recur. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not 
been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed her delinquencies to self-medicating her grief over the death 
of her sister. The passing of her sister was a circumstances beyond her control. However, 
she failed to establish that she acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to her debts. 
While she has filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and is reportedly paying on those debts, she 
continued to gamble up to six days prior to the hearing, despite attending an on-line help 
group. She had the burden to demonstrate that she addressed her debts and gambling 
addiction in a responsible or timely manner, and she has not met that burden. Full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR-alleged debts remain unresolved. She produced no evidence of 
participating in effective financial counseling. Despite her accounting background and 
financial counseling required for the bankruptcy filing, she succumbed to a gambling 
addition that she has been unable to control. While she has sought help from a grief 
support call center and a gambling support group, there are no clear indications that her 
financial and gambling problems are being resolved or are under control. Mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) has not been fully established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is suffering from 
debilitating grief as a result of the death of her sister. She has used gambling, 
overspending, alcohol, and overeating as means to cope with her grief. She has realized 
that she needs to get professional help, but has not yet engaged with mental-health 
professionals in a meaningful way. Despite her excellent performance evaluation, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
