 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03921 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 10, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 5, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on April 17, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 8, 2018. The Government offered 
four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on May 22, 2018, to allow 
 
2 
 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant 
submitted two Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A 
and B, which were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on May 14, 2018.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and is married with four children.  He has a high school 
diploma.  He holds the positon of Security Guard for a defense contractor.  He seeks to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has one large medical debt totaling 
approximately $16,500.  In his Answer, Applicant admits the debt.  Credit reports of the 
Applicant dated November 23, 2016; and October 26, 2017, reflect that the debt 
remains owing.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)  Applicant has held never held a 
security clearance before.    
 
 Applicant testified that he provides the only source of income for his wife and four 
children.  In 2015, he suffered three separate asthma attacks.  Together the medical 
expenses he incurred totaled approximately $16,500.  At the time, Applicant had 
medical insurance through the Government, but, he states that apparently, the medical 
services he received for his condition fell outside of the coverage.  Applicant has not 
tried to explore other options for medical insurance even though his employer offers it.  
Applicant states that he cannot afford to make any pays toward the debt at this time, as 
his wife is not working.  After taxes, Applicant brings home approximately $2,500 
monthly.  At the end of the month, after paying his regular monthly expenses, including 
$750 in rent, he has about $350 left that puts in savings.  Applicant tried to negotiate a 
payment plan with the creditor, but they wanted a payment plan of $200 per month.  
Applicant proposed that he could pay $50 or $75 per month, but the creditor was 
unwilling to accept it. 
 
 Two letters of recommendation, one from Applicant’s site supervisor, and the 
other from a coworker, attest to Applicant’s hard working nature and go-getter attitude.  
He is described as a natural leader, who is confident, optimistic, intelligent and detailed.  
He has a high moral character and unique ability to motivate and inspire himself and 
others around him.  Both of these individuals recommend Applicant for a security 
clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.)   
 
 
  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 In 2015, Applicant suffered three asthma attacks that caused him to become 
excessively indebted with a large medical bill.  He cannot afford to pay the bill.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Two Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s medical condition in 2015, resulting in delinquent medical bills was at 
some point beyond his control.  However, since then, three years has past and 
Applicant has done nothing to resolve his excessive delinquent medical debt.  Although 
he has about $350 left in discretionary funds, at the end of the month, he has chosen to 
put it in his savings account, instead of using it to pay his delinquent medical bill.  He 
has not acted reasonably nor responsibly under the circumstances.  His conduct does 
not show good judgment or reliability.  There are no clear indications that his financial 
problem is resolved and under control.  There has been no good faith effort to pay the 
debt.  The Financial Considerations concern has been not been mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
