                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        --------------------------------------                )      ADP  Case No. 17-03501          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole L. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding personal conduct, but did not mitigate the
trustworthiness concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility for a public
trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On November 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility to hold a
public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and DOD 5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel
Security Program (PSP).
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 16, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs) They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DoD Directive 5220.6, in accordance with the
guiding principles governing fair process proceedings in Exec. Or. 10865, and subject to
the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 13, 2017, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 6, 2018.  She did not supplement the record with objections to
any of the exhibit items in the FORM. Nor did she provide supplemental information
pertaining to her responses.
Summary of Pleadings
Under AG Financial Considerations, Applicant allegedly accumulated delinquent
debts exceeding $58,000. Allegedly, each of these listed debts remains outstanding and
unresolved.
Under AG Personal Conduct, Applicant allegedly falsified her electronic
questionnaires for investigations processing (e-QIP) executed in August 2016 by omitting
all of her delinquent debts. Allegedly, Applicant’s omissions reflect omissions of material
fact.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied all but two of the financial allegations
with explanations. She claimed she has been making payments on her student loans
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.o, she denied allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.b for the
stated reasons the lender did not complete the paperwork necessary to receive payments
through the Veterans Administration (based on her husband’s disability status as a
disabled veteran). Denying the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.n (a federal tax lien
entered in 2011 for $13,165), she claimed the debt is not hers. 
Applicant denied the remaining alleged debts. For these listed debts, she claimed
a lack of awareness of any of them. She claimed she will pursue payment arrangements
with the creditors listed in the SOR. Addressing the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 2.a,
Applicant denied falsifying her e-QIP. She claimed she was not aware of any accounts
being in delinquent status, and she did not feel that she deceived anyone or did anything
wrong when completing her e-QIP.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old administrative assistant for a defense contractor who
seeks eligibility for a public trust position. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant married her first husband in March 1991 and divorced in September
2003. (Item 3) She has one adult child from this marriage. She remarried in July 2005 and
has no children from this marriage. Applicant attended several colleges between August
1989 and June 1999 and earned an associate’s degree in office administration in June
1999. (Item 3) She reported no military service.
Applicant was recently employed by her current employer. She reported
unemployment between June 2016 and August 2016. (Item 3) Between July 2012 and
June 2016, she worked for various employers in administrative positions. (Item 3).
Applicant’s finances
Between September 2011 and September 2017, Applicant accumulated a number
of delinquent debts. Two of the debts represent sold student loans exceeding $27,000
that were in deferred status before they became due and payable in 2016. (Items 4-5)
Her other listed debts are comprised of medical and consumer debts that have been
reported to be in delinquent status in her most recent credit reports. (Items 4-5) 
While Applicant has disputed most of the listed SOR debts, she provided no
documented evidence to corroborate and substantiate the reasonable basis of her
disputes. Nor did she provide any documented evidence to demonstrate progress in
contacting the listed creditors to verify the listed debts and make payment arrangements
where warranted. By all evidentiary accounts, these listed medical and consumer debts
are presumed to belong to Applicant and remain unpaid and unresolved.
E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in August 2016, Applicant omitted all of the debts
listed in the SOR under ¶¶ 1.aa-1.kk. She denied any deliberate attempts to omit the
listed debts, claiming the only debts she acknowledged from listed debts in the SOR were
her student loans. And for these loans, she believed they were still in deferment status.
(Item 2) She assured she was not aware of any other delinquent accounts that were
referred for collection and denied having any federal tax lien. Without more to establish
motive or specific intent to omit these debts from her e-QIP, no inferences of falsification
can be attributed to Applicant in connection with her omissions of accounts reported to be
delinquent in her credit reports. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A, lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering trustworthiness cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect privacy information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
3
a concern about trustworthiness access and may be disqualifying (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness
concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to
hold a public trust decision should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do
not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of
the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with
App. A,  ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, ¶
2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person.  Based on her credit reports, the listed debts are
presumed to belong to her and are accurately reported. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable trustworthiness  risk. The following App A, ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1)
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
4
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a sensitive position may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a sensitive position depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality
of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
eligibility to hold a public trust position. The required materiality showing, however, does
not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
and related eligibility to hold sensitive positions be clearly consistent with the national
interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance
eligibility. “[Trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent
student loans, medical, and consumer debts. These debts have not been settled or
otherwise resolved and remain outstanding.
5
Holding a public trust position involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor in
protecting and guarding personally identifiable information (PII). DOD Manual 5200.02,
which incorporated and canceled DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, covers both critical-
sensitive and non-critical sensitive national security positions for civilian personnel. See
5200.02, ¶ 4.1a(3)(c)3. Positions designated as Category l and Category II automated
data processing positions (ADP) were previously classified as critical-sensitive and non-
critical sensitive positions under DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program, (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation), ¶¶ C3.1.2. 1.1.7. Other positions
that did not meet ADP criteria were classified as non-sensitive positions under the
Regulation.
Definitions for critical-sensitive and non-critical sensitive positions provided in
5200.02, ¶ 4.1a (3)(c) contain descriptions similar to those used to define ADP l and II 
positions under DoD Regulation 5200.2-R.  (32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J)
ADP positions are broken down as follows in 32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J):
ADP l (critical-sensitive positions covering the direction, design, and planning of
computer systems) and ADP II (non-critical-sensitive positions covering the design,
operation, and maintenance of computer systems).  Considered together, the ADP I and
II positions covered in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R refine and explain the same critical-
sensitive and non-critical-sensitive positions covered in DoD Manual 5200.02, ¶ 4.1a
(3)(c) and are reconcilable as included positions in 5200.02.  
So, although ADP trustworthiness positions are not expressly identified in DoD
Manual 5200.02, they are implicitly covered as non-critical sensitive positions that
require “access to automated systems that contain active duty, guard, or personally
identifiable information or information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise
protected from disclosure by DoD 5400.11-R. . . “. DoD 5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3(c). See
DoD Directive 5220.6 ¶¶ D5(d) and D8. By virtue of the implied retention of ADP
definitions in DoD Manual 5200.02, ADP cases continue to be covered by the process
afforded by DoD 5220.6.  
Financial concerns
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent student loan, medical, and consumer
debts collectively warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts;” 19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy
debts regardless of the ability to do so,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” 
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to two of the allegations negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)).
Each of Applicant’s delinquent debts are fully documented in her credit reports. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
6
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a non-critical sensitive  position.
While the principal concern of a non-critical sensitive position holder’s demonstrated
financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust
concerns are implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Applicant provided no documentary evidence of her addressing her reported
delinquent student loan, medical, and consumer debts, despite afforded opportunities to
do so, both before and after the issuance of the FORM. Without substantiating evidence
of her paying or otherwise resolving her student loan, medical, and consumer debts,
conclusions must be drawn that she has not addressed her payment obligations of the
listed debts in the SOR. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) In Applicant’s case, her lack of demonstrated responsible
efforts in addressing or otherwise resolving her delinquent student loan and consumer
debts with the income resources available to her preclude her from meeting public trust
position eligibility criteria at this time. See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
Personal Conduct
Allegations of Applicant’s falsifying her 2016 e-QIP by omitting her listed SOR
debts were never backed by sufficient evidence of motive and specific intent to
substantiate the allegations. So, while credibility assessments are more difficult to make
without a physical appearance of Applicant, her explanations under the circumstances
are sufficient to avert conclusions of falsification. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. She has shown
insufficient progress to date in addressing her student loans and other delinquent debts
to merit enough positive overall credit to mitigate financial concerns. While she warrants
credit for her educational achievements and work history in general, her overall efforts
are not enough to overcome historical trust and judgment issues associated with her
accumulation of delinquent student loan, medical, and consumer debts.
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing her finances are insufficient to
demonstrate solid probative evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment
to overcome reasonable doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with
respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.kk. 
7
By contrast, favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by SOR ¶ 2.a of the personal conduct guideline based on the absence of
probative evidence of motive and specific intent to falsify her e-QIP. Eligibility to hold a
security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is consistent with the
national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
    Subparagraphs 1.a-1.kk:                Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):      FOR APPLICANT
    Subparagraph 2.a:                                              For Applicant
               
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
  
10
