 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 17-03621 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                                            For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 In a response signed on 
January 24, 2018, he admitted the four allegations raised and requested a 
determination based on the written record. On February 15, 2018, the Government 
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with seven attachments (“Items”). The FORM 
amended the SOR with the addition of one allegation under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Applicant addressed neither the additional allegation nor the FORM within the 
time provided. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2018. Based on my review of 
the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Israel. The request was included in the FORM at Items 6-7. I have taken 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
administrative notice of those facts. The facts are summarized in the written request and 
will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that, while a close ally 
and trading partner of the United States, Israel has a documented history of illegally 
importing U.S. classified information and controlled technologies. The threat of terrorist 
attacks within Israel is an ongoing concern. A U.S. State Department travel warning is in 
effect for Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. Gaza is under the control of Hamas, a U.S. 
Government-designated foreign-terrorist organization. The government of Israel 
considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship to be Israeli citizens for 
immigration and other legal purposes. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and has been employed by the same government 
contractor as a software development team leader since 1998. He has earned both a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. Born in Moldova, he came to this country in 
2008 and became a naturalized United States citizen in 2015. Applicant is married and 
has two minor children. Scant information is available regarding Applicant’s home life, 
finances, or nexus to his community. 
 
 Applicant maintains relationships with individuals who are citizens and residents 
of Israel, including his parents, a sister, his parents-in-law, and multiple non-family 
members. Applicant’s mother is a retired social worker and his father is a retired high 
school sports coach. They have no affiliation with a foreign government, military, 
security, defense industry, or intelligence service. Applicant maintains telephonic and 
electronic contact with his parents, and he visits them when he is able.  
 
Applicant similarly maintains such contact with his married sister, a school 
teacher. She has no affiliation with a foreign government, military, security, defense 
industry, or intelligence service.  
 
Applicant has had telephonic and electronic contact with his father-in-law since 
meeting him in 1995. Applicant visits with him in person when he has the opportunity to 
do so. The father-in-law is semi-retired, continuing to work as a security guard for a 
commercial business. Applicant noted that the man has no governmental or military 
affiliations. Similar information was provided with regard to Applicant’s mother-in-law, a 
retired retail worker.  
 
Among other family with Israeli ties, Applicant’s sons are dual citizens of Israel 
and the United States. They are currently enrolled in schools in the United States. 
Applicant has daily contact with the children.   
 
 In addition, Applicant has ongoing relationships with non-family members who 
are citizens of Israel. One such individual is his supervisor, who is based in Israel as a 
manager. He is currently active as an officer in the reserve branch of the Israeli Defense 
Service (IDS). Another individual is a workplace colleague of Applicant, with whom he 
maintains telephonic and electronic contact, and who he sees during the colleague’s 
 
 
 
 
3 
quarterly visits to the United States. Applicant believes this person may presently be a 
reservist in the IDS. Applicant maintains telephonic and electronic contact with this 
individual, and they meet when the colleague visits the United States about every two 
years.  
 
Applicant maintains contact with several other work-related foreign nationals that 
Applicant feels he is bound by affection, influence, or obligation. (FORM, Item 5, at 17) 
Descriptions of these individuals are similar to those for his supervisor and workplace 
colleague. Except for his supervisor, none of these individuals has a current nexus to a 
foreign military or government.  
 
In February 2017, Applicant and his wife were on vacation. Applicant was with a 
friend who, at one point, bought some marijuana sold for medical purposes. He and 
Applicant used the drug through a pipe. Applicant used the marijuana on two occasions 
during his visit. In an August 2017 interview related to this process, Applicant was asked 
to confirm his “no” response to drug use in the last seven years. Applicant volunteered 
that he twice used marijuana on his 2017 vacation, after he had completed a June 2016 
security clearance application (SCA). (FORM, Item 5, at 26) The standard SCA explicitly 
inquires about past and present drug use. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under the 
AG, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national interest. In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
 
 
 
 
4 
proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizen to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Applicant has natural ties of affection with multiple family members who are 
citizens and residents of Israel. Moreover, he noted that he feels bound by affection, 
influence, or obligation to some of his Israel-based work-related contacts. I find 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) apply:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, and find the following to have the most 
potential applicability: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of 
the U.S. interests; and 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant is obviously close to his kin, with whom he maintains regular contact. 
His relationships with non-family members in Israel appear to be close, but of lesser 
concern. While Israel has a documented history of illegally importing U.S. classified 
information and controlled technologies, it remains a close ally of the U.S. and a 
significant trade partner. Applicant’s contacts appear to be average citizens; his 
colleagues work for the same U.S. defense contractor as Applicant. Under these facts, it 
appears highly unlikely Applicant would be put in a position to choose between the 
interests of Israel or his foreign kin over the interests of the United States. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(e) describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) 
 
 
 
 
6 
engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
Applicant completed a SCA in 2016. In the SCA, he was asked about drug use in 
the preceding seven years. Applicant denied drug misuse during that time frame. His 
SCA was submitted for consideration with the hope of being granted a security 
clearance. While the vetting process was pending, Applicant used marijuana. When 
asked to confirm his previous denial of drug use in the preceding seven years, Applicant 
confessed he had recently used marijuana. Given the pendency of his SCA, his recent 
drug use raises questions regarding his judgment. AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
AG ¶ 16 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 16 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
AG ¶ 16 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions is fully applicable in this case. In completing his 
2016 SCA, Applicant was put on notice that abuse of drugs, including marijuana, which 
is illegal on the federal level, was an issue in the vetting of individuals applying for a 
security clearance. He chose to use marijuana while his application for a security 
clearance was pending. He knew or should have known that marijuana use was illegal 
and could adversely affect his eligibility for a security clearance.2 Given these facts, and 
lacking information regarding his subsequent rehabilitative acts, if any, none of the 
available mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
                                                          
2 This is true regardless of whether Applicant’s friend had a prescription for the drug valid within his state.  
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s foreign contacts and drug use, I 
considered factors such as his age, profession, educational attainments, past 
employment, and lifestyle.  
 
While Applicant’s information regarding his family and associates in Israel is 
limited, it shows that it is highly unlikely Applicant would ever be forced to choose 
between Israel or his Israeli kith and kin, and the interests of the United States. Given 
these facts, foreign influence security concerns are sufficiently mitigated. Regarding 
Applicant’s recent marijuana use, however, it is noted that it occurred after he had 
completed his SCA and initiated the security clearance vetting process.  
 
A mature and educated individual with years of experience as a contractor, 
Applicant knew or should have known that marijuana use was antithetical to the 
maintenance of a security clearance. With such knowledge, however, he used the drug 
after submitting his SCA. While he should be commended for his candor, there is no 
information regarding subsequent commitment to abstinence or any action taken toward 
rehabilitation to mitigate security concerns. In light of the above, I find that Applicant 
failed to provide adequate evidence to mitigate foreign influence and personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
