 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02213 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on December 
26, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM, provide documentary evidence, or object to the Government’s evidence, and 
it is admitted. The case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He denied the SOR 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is a high school graduate. He disclosed on his 
January 2015 security clearance application (SCA) that he served on active duty in the 
military from February 2007 to October 2007; was in the National Guard from October 
2007 to December 2011; and was on active duty from December 2011 to July 2013. He 
received an honorable discharge. He disclosed that he has worked for a federal employer 
since 2010.1 He has never been married and has a 15-year-old child.2  
 
 In Applicant’s SCA he disclosed the credit card debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($11,201) and ¶ 1.d ($3,880). He disclosed that his financial problems began in December 
2013. He stated the same information for each debt as to why they were delinquent: 
 
Income decreased significantly after returning from my military deployment. 
Along with newly acquired financial responsibilities i.e.: new car and new 
apartment. 
 
Account [#] (amount owed $11,201.69) account was closed and currently 
being worked on with the collection agency in order to settle the debt. 
 
Budgeting my finances in efforts to satisfy my debt that is owed to [creditor]. 
Coming up with a valid payment plan that I can afford. Scheduling a set due 
date that I can abide by each month until the total debt is satisfied.3 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to SOR ¶ 1.c ($11,201) he stated: “Admit-I pay $112 /month 
on this account.”4 His answer to SOR ¶ 1.d ($3,880) was: “Admit-I pay $39/month on this 
account.”5  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s disclosure that he has worked for a federal employer since 2010 contradicts the dates he was 
serving in the military. It may be that his employer held his job for him while he was serving. No other 
clarifying information was provided.  
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 Credit reports from June 2017 and February 2015 corroborate all of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. The June 2017 credit report shows that Applicant made a payment 
of $112 on the account in SOR ¶ 1.c, and reflected a past-due amount of $6,119. The 
delinquency began in February 2014. Both credit reports show the debt was charged off 
in May 2014. The June 2017 credit report reflected a payment of $39 on the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.d and a past-due amount of $2,007. Both credit reports show the debt was charged 
off in October 2014. It is unknown when Applicant began making payments, if they were 
consistent, and if he has an agreed upon settlement with the creditors.6  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR answer, he denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($32,357) and stated 
“Deny-In the process of being removed from my credit report.” He further stated: 
 
Legal challenges have been sent to all 3 major credit bureaus in reference 
to this account. Due to the fact that the state of [X] requires the credit 
bureaus to uphold their statutory obligations to consumers with regard to 
fairness and accuracy of their credit reports. Therefore this account is in the 
process of being removed from my credit report.7 
 
 Applicant did not explain if he had an account with the creditor, if he timely paid 
the account, the basis of his legal challenge, or the results of his challenges to the credit 
bureaus. He did not provide evidence that the debt was removed from his credit report. 
 
 Applicant’s response to SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,199) was: “Deny-Item removed from my 
credit report.” His response to SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,071) was: “Deny-Item removed from my 
credit report.”8 He did not provide evidence that these debts did not belong to him or if he 
paid them. He did not provide evidence that the debts are no longer reported on his credit 
report.  
 
 Applicant did not provide information about his current finances, budget, and if he 
has participated in financial counseling. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
6 Items 4, 5. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2014, which he is 
unable or unwilling to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
6 
 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant disclosed two delinquent debts on his 2015 SCA that are alleged in the 
SOR. His June 2017 credit report reflects that he has made some payments toward the 
two debts, but it is unknown for how long and if they were consistent. He has not provided 
sufficient and corroborating documentary evidence that the remaining delinquent debts 
did not belong to him; he does not owe them; he has paid them; he has a payment plan; 
he has disputed them with the creditor or credit bureaus; or the basis of the dispute and 
its resolution. He indicated they were to be removed from his credit report or had been 
removed, but did not provide documentary evidence to support his position. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure 
to pay his financial obligations casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
In Applicant’s SCA, he attributed his financial problems to his income significantly 
deceasing after returning from his military deployment and acquiring new financial 
responsibilities, such as a new car and apartment. Applicant’s decrease in income was 
beyond his control. Acquiring a new car and apartment was within his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. It appears at some 
point, Applicant began addressing two of his delinquent debts, but he failed to provide 
sufficient corroborating evidence that the other SOR debts have been resolved. AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is some evidence that Applicant is paying two delinquent debts. It is 
unknown how long he has been making payments. There is sufficient evidence to apply 
AG ¶ 20(d) to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude there are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved or under control. Applicant has three SOR debts totaling approximately 
$47,627 that are unresolved. Applicant’s response was these debts were being removed 
or were removed from his credit report. He failed to address why he had not paid them, 
what the specifics of his disputes were, and what corroborating documents he has to 
support his explanation that he was no longer obligated to pay them. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), 
and 20(e) do not apply to the three remaining debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He served in the military and received an honorable 
discharge. He attributed his financial problems to a decrease in income when he was 
discharged from the military in 2013. He failed to provide corroborating evidence that he 
is not responsible for the debts alleged in the SOR or his actions to resolve them. At this 
juncture, Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
