 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02160 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 26, 2015 
(SCA). On June 29, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines F, G, J, and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 28, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018. On April 12, 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for May 17, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
2 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted into evidence, without objection. 
Applicant’s objection to GE 2 was sustained on the grounds that it was not 
authenticated.1 I appended to the record a letter the Government sent to Applicant as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s exhibit list as HE II. At the hearing, 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were 
admitted into evidence, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant, age 28, has never been married nor does he have any children. He 
received his high school diploma in 2009. He took college courses between 2010 and 
2011, and has earned four job-related certifications. Applicant has maintained a DOD 
security clearance without incident since July 2010, when he began working for a 
defense contractor, by whom he remained employed until September 2017, when he 
began working for his current defense-contractor employer. He has served the same 
U.S. military contract since June 2013. His job duties require him to maintain a security 
clearance.3  
 
In October 2010, Applicant was in a vehicle with a friend who was in possession 
of marijuana. A police officer had cause to stop and search the vehicle and charged 
both occupants with possession of marijuana. On that occasion, Applicant was not, 
himself, in possession of marijuana. In December 2010, the charge was nolle prosequi 
after his friend plead guilty.4  
 
Between October 2010 and June 2011, Applicant smoked marijuana 
approximately 15 to 20 times. On each occasion, he was either hanging out with friends 
or at a party. Applicant consumed psilocybin mushrooms,5 just to experiment with them, 
on only one occasion during a party in May 2011. He stopped using marijuana once he 
fully realized the negative impact it would have on his career.6  
 
Because Applicant held a security clearance and worked for a defense contractor 
at the time, he knew that his marijuana and mushroom use were “stupid” things to do 
and “wrong.” Applicant has no intent to use marijuana, mushrooms, or other illegal 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 10-12. Even though GE 2 (a summary of Applicant’s security clearance background interview) was 
not admitted into the record, a copy remains in the record file since it was marked and not withdrawn by 
the Government. I did not review nor consider it in rendering my decision. 
 
2 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR Answer and his SCA (GE 1). 
 
3 AE C and E; Tr. at 14-16, 20, 34-35. 
 
4 AE J; Tr. at 24-26.  
 
5 The parties stipulated that the “mushrooms” alleged in the SOR refer to illegal “psilocybin” mushrooms. 
Tr. at 8-9. 
  
6 Tr. at 23-24, 30-36. 
 
3 
 
drugs in the future. In July 2017, he consented to the automatic revocation of his 
security clearance should he do so. He no longer associates with the friends involved 
with his drug use and possession charge.7 Upon the advice of counsel, he submitted to 
two drug screens, in July and August 2017, which were both negative. He passed a pre-
hire drug test in September 2017.8 
 
In November 2014, Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication while 
at a house party. He did not realize how intoxicated he had become by the time he left 
the party and drove his vehicle, until he lost control and crashed into several parked 
cars. Police officers arrived at the scene, arrested Applicant, and charged him with 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), 1st. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was .17%. In 
August 2015, Applicant pled guilty. The court sentenced him to 12 days in jail 
(suspended) and 12 months unsupervised probation, restricted his driver’s license 
through August 2016, and required him to install an ignition interlock device (IID) on his 
vehicle.9  
 
Although the record does not specify that Applicant successfully completed his 
probation, it suggests that he did. In April 2016, the Court granted Applicant’s motion to 
remove the IID. Further, in August 2016, Applicant successfully completed an Alcohol 
Safety Action Program, which included four weeks of substance abuse education and 
16-weeks of alcohol counseling. As of the hearing, he maintained a valid driver’s license 
with no restrictions.10  
 
While Applicant continues to consume alcohol (approximately two to three beers 
on the weekends or during special occasions), he has not consumed alcohol to the 
point of intoxication, nor driven a vehicle after consuming any amount of alcohol, since 
November 2014. Applicant has either designated a sober driver or used a ride-sharing 
service to avoid driving if he has consumed any amount of alcohol. In a July 2017 
statement, Applicant consented to the automatic revocation of his security clearance 
should he ever “abuse” alcohol again. At the hearing, Applicant defined that “abuse” as 
becoming intoxicated to a point where he does not have “full control” over himself. He 
understood that consenting to an automatic revocation for alcohol abuse is not a 
mitigating condition under Guideline G nor otherwise required by the AG, but he 
believed that it was “worth it” for him to sign and abide by that statement.11 He was not 
diagnosed with an alcohol use disorder by a counselor evaluating him for such in 
August 2017.12 
                                                          
7 AE F; Tr. at 24-25. 
 
8 AE H; Tr. at 23-24, 25, 28, 35, 38. 
 
9 AE B, D, E, I, and K; Tr. at 26-30. 
  
10 AE B, D, E, I, and K; Tr. at 20, 26-30. 
  
11 AE E and G; Tr. at 21-23, 26-27; 29-30, 35-40.  
 
12 AE E; Tr. at 21, 22. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant reported his DWI charge to his employer’s security officer at the time 
the incident occurred. Applicant reported his marijuana and mushroom use, and 
marijuana and DWI charges on his June 2015 SCA and discussed them in his answer 
to the SOR and during his hearing. Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the 
hearing. He acknowledged and accepted full responsibility for his actions. He has 
matured, become successful in his career, and better understands the negative 
repercussions of any future such conduct.13 
 
Applicant’s work performance and character were highly regarded by the 13 
references (friends, colleagues, and superiors) who wrote letters of support. Each of his 
references were aware of one or more the SOR allegations. They corroborated that 
Applicant has matured and learned from his mistakes, and is deserving of a second 
chance. A graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy who has known Applicant since he was 
a boy has “never been anything but impressed by his character, trustworthiness, and 
dependability.” Applicant’s “sterling” work ethic, honesty, and trustworthiness were 
unanimously praised by six individuals with whom he is currently employed by or with, 
including the Director and Deputy Director of the organization. The Senior Program 
Director of Applicant’s former employer described his personal and professional 
experience with Applicant as “exceptional.”14 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”15 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”16 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”17 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
                                                          
13 AE H; SCA at 25; Tr. at 24, 28, 33, 35, 36-38. 
 
14 AE A and L; Tr. at 17-20. 
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
16 Egan at 527. 
 
17 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.19 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”20 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.21 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.22 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.23 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”24 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”25 
 
                                                          
18 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
19 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
20 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
22 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
23 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
25 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: “The illegal use of 
controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs, 
and the use of other substances that cause physical or mental impairment or are used 
in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to 
physical or psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled substance 
means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the 
generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.”  
 
Because Applicant was not in possession of marijuana, I find that no disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline apply to that 2010 charge. However, his use of 
marijuana 15 to 20 times and one-time use of psilocybin mushrooms, between October 
2010 and June 2011, while in possession of security clearance, does establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline, as follows: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
AG ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position. 
 
The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Any illegal drug use is troubling in the context of evaluating security worthiness, 
but is particularly egregious when it occurs while in possession of a security clearance. 
However, Applicant has fully mitigated the concern. He has not used any illegal drugs in 
over seven years and has no intent to use any illegal drugs in the future. Moreover, he 
not only acknowledged the incompatibility of any illegal drug use with his maintenance 
 
7 
 
of a security clearance, but also agreed that it would be automatically revoked should 
he use illegal drugs again. Based on the record evidence and Applicant’s sincere, 
candid, and credible hearing testimony, I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use, 
especially while in possession of a security clearance, is not likely to recur, and no 
longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s 2015 DWI conviction, involving a 2014 incident where Applicant 
excessively consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual's alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s 2015 DWI conviction resulted from circumstances not likely to recur. 
In November 2014, Applicant exercised extremely poor judgment by driving a vehicle 
after having consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication with a BAC of .17%. Since 
then, Applicant has demonstrated a pattern of responsible consumption of alcohol. He 
has also taken the necessary precautions, by designating a sober driver or using a ride-
sharing service, to avoid driving a vehicle on any occasion that he has consumed any 
 
8 
 
amount of alcohol. In nearly four years, he has neither consumed alcohol to the point of 
intoxication or impaired judgment, nor driven a vehicle after consuming alcohol. 
Accordingly, Applicant has demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me 
to conclude that the questionable judgment associated with his 2015 DWI conviction is 
behind him.  
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s 2015 DWI conviction and 2010 possession of marijuana charge 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own 
would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which 
in combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 32 (c): no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed 
the offence; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but 
not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 (c) is established to mitigate the possession of marijuana charge. 
Incorporating my comments under Guideline G, AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are established 
to mitigate the DWI conviction given the evidence of Applicant’s successful 
rehabilitation.  
 
 
9 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline, as set out in AG ¶ 15, includes:  
 
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.”  
 
Applicant’s drug use while in possession of a security clearance establishes the 
general concerns involving questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(f): violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factor: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Incorporating my comments under Guideline H, I conclude that Applicant’s past 
drug use while in possession of a security no longer casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
 
10 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F, H, J, and G in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, G, J, and E, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug use and driving while intoxicated 
conviction. Accordingly, Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
