1 
 
 
 
 
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 17-02492 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Frank A. Manfredi, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was arrested on five separate occasions between April 2009 and June 
2016 on criminal charges stemming from domestic disputes. He has completed anger 
management and is remarried, but doubts persist about his reform in light of his 
minimization of his culpability. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 11, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The SOR explained why the DOD CAF was unable to find it clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF 
took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
 
2 
 
Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 4, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
On January 8, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On January 11, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for February 8, 2018.  
 
At the hearing, seven Government exhibits (GEs 1-7) were admitted in evidence, GE 
5 over Applicant’s hearsay objections. An October 30, 2017 letter forwarding discovery of 
the GEs to Applicant’s counsel was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) but not admitted as 
an evidentiary exhibit. Sixteen Applicant exhibits (AEs A-P) were admitted in evidence. 
Applicant and his brother testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on February 20, 
2018. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline J and cross-alleges under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 
2.a) that Applicant was arrested in April 2009 for felony terroristic threats and acts (SOR ¶ 
1.a); in September 2014 for risk of injury to a child, disorderly conduct, and reckless 
endangerment (SOR ¶ 1.b); in February 2015 for criminal possession of a firearm while 
subject to a protective order and for interfering with a police officer (SOR ¶ 1.c); in 
November 2015 for risk of injury to a child and disorderly conduct (SOR ¶ 1.d); and in June 
2016 for violating a restraining order and a protective order (SOR ¶ 1.e). Additionally, 
Applicant is alleged to have pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct and reckless 
endangerment in May 2017 for which he was sentenced to nine months in jail, suspended, 
and to probation until May 22, 2018 (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed response to the SOR allegations in which he denied 
engaging in the criminal conduct alleged. He admitted that he had yelled at his then wife’s 
boyfriend in April 2009, but he denied making any threats. He asserted with regard to the 
September 2014 incident that he was only taking his younger daughter to the store when 
he was assaulted by his daughter’s step-grandfather and the charges were dismissed. 
Regarding his criminal possession of a firearm in February 2015, Applicant explained that 
he had transferred custody of a rifle to a friend, who refused to turn it in to the police for 
him, but the charges were dismissed after his brother turned over the firearm to the police. 
In November 2015, Applicant indicated that his then cohabitant girlfriend became upset 
after their daughter became sick. He was arrested after he pushed open the door to his 
older daughter’s room “to check on her and something fell and broke.” He admitted that a 
restraining order was issued against him prohibiting him from any contact with his ex-
girlfriend. He denied any intentional violation of the order in June 2016, asserting that he 
had returned a telephone call to an unknown number and his younger daughter answered 
the phone. Applicant explained that he did not believe that he had committed any criminal 
offenses, but he wanted to get on with his life so he pleaded guilty under the Alfred 
3 
 
Doctrine to disorderly conduct and reckless endangerment charges for the November 2015 
incident. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old pipefitter supervisor with a defense contractor. After 
graduating from high school, he served on active duty as an electronics technician in a 
branch of the U.S. military for 15 years. He was honorably discharged at the rank of chief 
petty officer in August 2012, and he began his present employment in December 2012. 
(GE 1; AEs A, H; Tr. 33-38.) Applicant held a security clearance for his military duties up to 
the level of top secret with sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Applicant was married to his first wife from November 1999 to September 2009. 
They had a daughter and a son, now ages 14 and 10. He and his ex-wife experienced 
marital discord near the end of their marriage. After an incident in August or September 
2006 involving a loud verbal altercation with his then wife, Applicant voluntarily attended a 
ten-week anger management class. In December 2007, the police were called to his home 
for a domestic disturbance which occurred while his then wife was moving out of their 
home with their children. They reconciled in January 2008, and Applicant underwent 
marriage counseling. On October 17, 2008, Applicant was determined eligible for a top 
secret clearance and SCI access conditioned on him refraining from any future behavior 
that would reflect adversely on his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. (GE 2; Tr. 38.) 
 
On April 22, 2009, Applicant was arrested on a felony charge of making terroristic 
threats and acts against his first wife’s boyfriend. Applicant asserts, with no evidence to the 
contrary, that he returned from a three-month deployment to find that his spouse was 
involved in a cohabitant, adulterous relationship. Applicant became emotionally distraught 
on finding his spouse’s boyfriend in the marital home with his children, and he told his 
spouse’s boyfriend that he would “rip his head off” if he did not leave the property. 
Applicant’s spouse contacted the police, and Applicant was arrested despite his denials of 
making any terroristic threats. At his bond hearing, he was ordered to complete an anger-
management class. The threat charge was dismissed on June 17, 2010, after he showed 
that he had successfully completed the anger management class and had no further 
similar incidents. (GEs 3-4, 7; Tr. 40-43.) Applicant filed a timely report of his arrest to his 
command. His duty station was transferred in early 2010 to resolve personal issues that 
impacted his performance. (GEs 4, 7.) 
 
 As part of the employment application process for his current employer, Applicant 
completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) on November 19, 2012. Applicant disclosed his arrest for “verbal threat” in April 
2009 and indicated that he was acquitted of the charge. (GE 1.) Applicant’s security 
clearance was renewed for his defense-contractor employment. (Tr. 39.) 
 
4 
 
Applicant and a now ex-girlfriend began a cohabitant relationship in his home in 
January 2012. (GE 1.) They had a daughter in 2012. (Tr. 44.) The eleven-year difference in 
age between Applicant and his then girlfriend and their incompatible work schedules led 
them to pursue their own activities and friendships. On September 17, 2014, they were in 
the process of what Applicant characterized as an amicable break from each other. While 
his ex-girlfriend was removing her belongings from his house with the help of her family 
members, he decided to take their daughter, then two years old, to the store. He asserts 
that his ex-girlfriend “seemed fine with it.” As he was exiting his driveway with their 
daughter, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend’s sister began yelling that he was kidnapping his 
daughter. Applicant explained that his ex-girlfriend’s stepfather jumped into the bed of his 
truck, began pounding on the roof, punched out his back window, and began choking him. 
Applicant drove down the roadway as this was occurring before pulling into a nearby 
fire/police safety complex for assistance. (Tr. 44-50.) 
 
The police report indicates that Applicant acknowledged that he had become upset 
when he learned that his ex-girlfriend was going to take all of their daughter’s belongings to 
her stepfather’s residence. He admitted to the police that he drove down the road with his 
ex-girlfriend’s stepfather in his truck bed, and, as he approached the safety complex, his 
ex-girlfriend’s stepfather punched in the rear window, causing it to shatter. His ex-
girlfriend’s stepfather then entered the cab and wrapped his hands around Applicant’s neck 
while Applicant’s daughter was in the backseat crying. The stepfather told the police that 
he and other family members believed Applicant did not have permission to take his 
daughter; that he observed Applicant place his daughter in the backseat without being 
properly restrained; and that Applicant shifted his vehicle in reverse toward him and his 
grandson as he exited the driveway. He related that he had to jump in the truck bed to 
avoid being struck by Applicant, and that Applicant operated his truck erratically on the 
road. After Applicant failed to respond to his pleas to stop, he punched out the back 
window in an attempt to shift the vehicle in park. An uninvolved witness to the incident 
provided a sworn statement attesting to observing the stepfather in the truck bed pounding 
on its roof as the truck sped away with tires spinning. Applicant’s ex-girlfriend told the 
police that Applicant had been physically and mentally abusive to her over the past two 
years and that she had decided to move out to avoid further abuse. Applicant and his ex-
girlfriend’s stepfather were both arrested for risk of injury to a child, disorderly conduct, and 
reckless endangerment in the second degree. The charges against Applicant were 
dismissed on his completion of a family-education program in September 2015. (GE 7; Tr. 
44-50.)  
 
As a result of the arrest, a protective order was issued against Applicant in 
September 2014 prohibiting him from harassing, threatening, or stalking his ex-girlfriend or 
their daughter. Applicant was also required to surrender any firearms in his possession. 
Applicant owned a .22-caliber rifle that he inherited from his grandfather. (Tr. 50.) Applicant 
transferred custody of the firearm to a friend (Mr. X). On December 19, 2014, court officials 
informed the police that they had information that Applicant was still in possession of the 
rifle and asked them to investigate. Applicant told the police that he had transferred the 
firearm to Mr. X, and in the presence of the officers, Applicant contacted Mr. X and told him 
that the firearm had to be turned over to the police. Applicant told the police that he would 
5 
 
be at the station that afternoon with the firearm. As of December 26, 2014, Applicant had 
not surrendered it to the police. When contacted, Applicant explained that he had 
completed the paperwork for the firearm transfer to Mr. X. After being advised by the police 
that he had to turn in the weapon to either the state police or a federally-licensed firearms 
dealer, of which Mr. X was neither, Applicant argued that Mr. X could legally possess his 
firearm for safekeeping. On December 27, 2014, Mr. X confirmed that he had the firearm 
but not at his residence, and he indicated that he would bring it to the police on December 
28, 2014. The next day, he told the police that he had given the firearm to Applicant’s 
brother. The police report indicates that Applicant evasively indicated, on January 3, 2015, 
that he could not recall the last name of Mr. X. Applicant told the police that the firearm had 
been given to his brother legally under the new gun laws because his brother is a “federal 
employee.” The next day, Applicant’s brother, who is in the U.S. military, contacted the 
police and confirmed that he had the firearm. He turned over the firearm to the police. On 
February 6, 2015, Applicant was arrested for criminal possession of a firearm while subject 
to a protective order and for interfering with a police officer. (GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant asserts that he thought he was in full compliance with the protective order 
by transferring possession of the rifle to Mr. X. Applicant’s latest account of the incident 
differs somewhat from the police report in that, when the police first confronted him about 
the gun, he signed a form for the firearm transfer but was told that it was the wrong form, 
and that he was required to surrender the firearm to the police immediately. He called his 
friend, who promised to turn in the firearm but did not do so. Applicant indicated that at his 
request, his brother obtained the firearm from Mr. X and turned it in to the police. (Tr. 50-
55.) Applicant denies that he interfered with a police officer and asserts that all he did was 
tell his friend that he had to turn in the firearm. (Tr. 56.) The charges were dismissed.  
 
By November 2015, Applicant and his ex-girlfriend were again cohabitants, but they 
had not been sharing much time together. He had his two children from his first marriage at 
his house the night before the Thanksgiving holiday, and they were planning dinner at 
home. Applicant explained that there was some tension between him and his ex-girlfriend 
after their daughter vomited, and his ex-girlfriend became “very distraught” thinking it was 
blood. Applicant claims that he tried to explain to her that it was not blood by using his 
pocket knife to prick for blood to test with peroxide, but she accused him of not caring 
about their daughter. He opined that “she was just really embarrassed that she as wrong 
and that she overreacted.” He then went to comfort his older daughter who had gone to her 
room and had barricaded her door by pushing a dresser against it. When he pushed open 
the door, a glass bowl on the dresser fell over and broke. While Applicant had “moved on 
to the point of trying to comfort [his] daughter,” his ex-girlfriend intruded on his daughter’s 
space and was “really aggressive.” Applicant denies that he did anything wrong, but his ex-
girlfriend called the police. (Tr. 58-66.) 
 
The police report indicates that on their arrival, they met with Applicant’s ex-girlfriend 
who informed them that Applicant was throwing things around the house and breaking 
items. She complained that Applicant started to get out of control and had thrown a glass 
of water at her before going upstairs and breaking through the door of his daughter’s 
bedroom. Applicant’s daughter, then 11 years old, was hiding in her bedroom. Applicant’s 
6 
 
ex-girlfriend complained that Applicant started to push her, but she ran into the bathroom 
and called 9-1-1 before he broke into that door also. When Applicant was interviewed by 
the police, he admitted that he and his ex-girlfriend argued, and he threw water from a 
glass at her thinking that it would calm her down. His older daughter was crying upstairs in 
her bedroom. He told the police that when he went to calm his daughter, he discovered that 
the bedroom door was locked. He pushed the door open, and it caused a glass dish to fall 
from the dresser and break. He denied that he touched either his ex-girlfriend or his 
daughter. The police arrested him for risk of injury to a child and disorderly conduct. (GE 
5.) 
 
Applicant had a psychiatric evaluation in December 2015. He explained that 
preparations for dinner were underway in his home when his two-year-old daughter 
coughed up a red substance that the girl’s mother believed was blood. He indicated that his 
ex-girlfriend was inappropriately overprotective of their daughter. When she refused to 
listen to his reasoning, he attempted to demonstrate by drawing some blood from his own 
arm, but she called the police and conveyed that he had threatened her with violence in the 
children’s presence. The psychiatrist opined that Applicant had a consistently rational 
approach, although he may have used poor judgment by using a knife to prove his point 
when his ex-girlfriend was already upset. He was assessed as not being a danger to 
himself or others, but he could benefit from counseling for the next three months to 
facilitate reunion with his family. (AE C.) 
 
Applicant asserts that his ex-girlfriend “completely lied” to the police. He explained 
that damage to his bathroom door was committed by a former tenant (Tr. 66-67) and that 
the door to his older daughter’s bedroom was unlocked (“I just turned—the door wasn’t 
locked, she just closed it and pushed the dresser in front of it.”). (Tr. 77.) As to why his 
daughter would block her door with her dresser, Applicant responded, “I just thought that 
maybe she was disturbed or freaked out because of the blood.” Applicant denied he had 
done anything that day that could be perceived as threatening by his then 11-year-old 
daughter. (Tr. 81.) Available court checks show that, at final disposition on May 22, 2017, 
Applicant pleaded guilty to misdemeanor disorderly conduct and to misdemeanor reckless 
endangerment. He was sentenced on the disorderly conduct charge to three months in jail, 
execution suspended, and to one year of probation, and for reckless endangerment to six 
months in jail, execution suspended, and to one year of probation. (GE 6.) Applicant 
testified about the disposition as follows: 
 
Most of the case in all the cases were dropped and disposed of. I did plead 
no contest under the Alford Doctrine as a part to resolve my cases and take 
some responsibility. I was physically there and involved in each one of these 
circumstances. I’m a man and I’m responsible for my actions. I’m responsible 
for my name. And I wanted to resolve the cases so it wouldn’t continue 
drawing on through court and take my own personal responsibility for 
everything that happened. (Tr. 68.) 
 
On November 27, 2015, a protective order was issued against Applicant prohibiting 
him from contacting his ex-girlfriend in any manner, including in writing, by telephone, or 
7 
 
electronically, either at home, workplace, or through others with whom the contact would 
likely cause annoyance or alarm to his ex-girlfriend. On December 15, 2015, a restraining 
order was issued against Applicant. By then, Applicant was involved in a custody battle 
with his ex-girlfriend over their daughter. Applicant obtained a civil court order granting him 
visitation with their daughter, but only through a third party of his ex-girlfriend’s choosing. 
(GE 6; Tr. 69-70.) 
 
On March 31, 2016, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend filed a domestic-violence report with the 
police at the direction of her domestic-violence victim’s advocate who told her to report 
messages that she had been receiving indirectly, through a third party, in violation of the 
protective and restraining orders. Among the messages reviewed by the police was a text 
message sent to her old phone number proposing that she drop the restraining order and 
her petition for sole custody. In return, Applicant indicated that he would pay her $400 a 
month in child support. Applicant’s ex-girlfriend informed the police that she had changed 
her phone number because of the annoying messages. The police contacted the third 
party, who confirmed he had relayed the messages at Applicant’s request. On April 1, 
2016, the police contacted Applicant, who acknowledged the outstanding protective and 
restraining orders, and that he had relayed some messages through the third party (his 
daughter’s godfather). He admitted that a message about dropping the restraining order 
sounded like something he asked the third party to send, but he did not know what 
messages were exchanged. During an interview with the police on April 12, 2016, Applicant 
related that he did not contact his ex-girlfriend directly. He admitted that he had sent 
approximately six to eight messages to the third party to relay to his ex-girlfriend, but he 
claimed they were in response to his ex-girlfriend’s inquiries, and he did not believe they 
would annoy or alarm her. On April 14, 2016, the protective order was renewed against 
Applicant, which prohibited him from having any contact with his ex-girlfriend. Applicant 
was allowed to speak to their daughter. (GE 6.) Pursuant to a family court order, Applicant 
completed a parenting education class on April 16, 2016.1 (AE O.) He completed a four-
hour anger-management class on November 6, 2016. (AE P.) 
 
On May 7, 2016, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend called him so that he could speak to their 
daughter. She received a call from Applicant’s work cell phone in response that lasted five 
minutes. On May 24, 2016, she complained to the police that Applicant had violated the 
protective and restraining orders. On May 7, 2016, he had “played dumb” and said he was 
calling about a contracting job. After she “called him out,” he indicated that he wanted her 
to drop the protective and restraining orders against him and that he wanted to see their 
daughter. When queried by the police, Applicant denied that he had called his ex-girlfriend 
and claimed that he frequently received random phone calls. Applicant then denied that he 
had spoken to his ex-girlfriend outside of court. On June 9, 2016, Applicant was arrested 
for violating a protective order and violating a restraining order on May 7, 2016. (GE 5.) 
 
                                                 
1 Applicant testified that he had to complete an anger management class, a parenting class, and a 26-week 
program as conditions of his probation for the November 2015 incident. (Tr. 73, 78.) He admitted on cross-
examination that he had taken other classes as required by the civil court related to custody proceedings 
involving his daughter. See AEs O-P. 
8 
 
Applicant recalls the telephone contact as being unintentional. He claims that he 
returned a missed call who he thought was from “a husband of a family friend.” He denied 
knowing that his ex-girlfriend had changed her telephone number, but as soon as his ex-
girlfriend answered the phone, she put their daughter on the phone, and he spoke to her 
for a couple of minutes. According to Applicant, he proved his side in court and the charges 
were dismissed. (Tr. 71-72.) 
 
On November 9, 2016, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend was awarded full custody of their 
daughter. On November 17, 2016, his ex-girlfriend complained to the police that Applicant 
had sent emails to their daughter’s daycare asking when she picked up their daughter. She 
expressed concern that he would use the information to follow them to see where they live 
or to hurt them. She stated to the police that Applicant could only see their daughter in a 
locked facility with a psychiatrist present because he is mentally unstable. The protective 
order covered Applicant’s ex-girlfriend and their daughter, while the restraining order 
covered only his ex-girlfriend, but both orders included a no-contact provision. The police 
confirmed with the daycare that Applicant sent two emails inquiring about his daughter’s 
attendance and the dates and times she was there. Applicant admitted to the police that he 
sent the emails but that he needed to confirm his daughter’s attendance because he was 
obligated to pay a portion of her daycare expenses under a civil court order. The police 
declined to obtain a warrant for his arrest because he is required to pay for daycare and 
needed the information. (GE 5.) 
 
Applicant was on supervised probation for the November 2015 misdemeanors until 
May 22, 2018. As of October 2017, Applicant was in compliance with his probation. Urine 
screens were negative for all substances, and he was attending a 26-week domestic-
violence program in good standing. (AE M.) Applicant had no incidents while on probation 
as of February 8, 2018. He was in week 25 of his domestic-violence program, which he 
described as a “family re-entry program.” (Tr. 73.) 
 
Applicant remarried in May 2017. (AE B.) He has contact with his ex-wife only 
through a dedicated email address. (Tr. 74-75.) He has not seen his older daughter since 
the incident in November 2015. He sees their son once or twice a month. Applicant 
testified that he had once weekly contact by telephone with his daughter after November 
2015 until February 2017, when his ex-wife “heard something that she didn’t want to hear,” 
and hung up the phone. He has had no contact with his daughter since then. He was told 
by his ex-wife that it is his daughter’s choice. He testified to his belief that his ex-wife has 
some influence on their daughter and that their daughter “actually says she wants a 
relationship” with him. He denies that he ever struck or threatened his daughter. He is 
working through a family court to possibly arrange to see his daughter with a therapist 
present. (Tr. 84-87.) Applicant has visitation rights with his younger daughter by court 
order. When he picks up his younger daughter from his ex-girlfriend for weekend visits, his 
new wife is always with him. (Tr. 75.) 
9 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s brother testified and submitted a character reference letter (AE H) for 
Applicant. As of February 2018, he had been on active duty in the U.S. military for the past 
16 ½ years. He served together with Applicant from approximately October 2002 until 
Applicant transferred in the summer of 2005. They held the same occupational specialty 
and handled classified information almost daily. He considers Applicant a patriot and not a 
security risk. Applicant’s brother testified that he is aware of the incidents involving 
Applicant’s ex-wife and ex-girlfriend, but he later acknowledged that he has heard “little bits 
here and little bits there, but nothing—not like the total information . . . on it.” He also 
testified that he believes every word that Applicant tells him. He has no issue with leaving 
his 10-year-old son with Applicant. In his observation, Applicant “loves his children very 
much.” (AE H; Tr. 90-97.) 
 
 Applicant’s current spouse provided a character reference letter in which she 
attested to Applicant having been open with her about his arrests. She indicates that she 
had her own “run ins” with Applicant’s ex-girlfriend and that she observed “her hostility and 
aggressiveness.” Applicant has become a father figure to her own daughters from a 
previous relationship. He has exhibited pride in his former military service and current 
defense-contractor employment, and she wholeheartedly endorses him for continued 
security clearance eligibility. (AE L.) 
 
 Managers and co-workers attest to Applicant’s dedication, professionalism, and 
reliability on the job since he was hired in December 2012. Applicant supervises the work 
of 8 to 15 employees depending on the workload. He works overtime when needed to get 
the work completed correctly. Applicant is considered to be a valuable asset to his team. 
He has been trustworthy in handling classified and sensitive information and thorough in 
briefing personnel to ensure that material is handled at the appropriate classification level. 
(AEs E-G, I-K.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
10 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
 The criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines will be discussed together, 
given that the same conduct is alleged under both guidelines. Criminal conduct security 
concerns are articulated in AG ¶ 30 under Guideline J, which states: 
  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Personal conduct security concerns are articulated in AG ¶ 15 under Guideline E, 
which states: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
11 
 
 Applicant was arrested for terroristic acts and threats in April 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a); for 
risk of injury to a child, disorderly conduct, and reckless endangerment in the second 
degree in September 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.b); for criminal possession of a firearm while subject 
of a protective order and for interfering with a police officer in February 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.c); 
for risk of injury to a child and disorderly conduct in November 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d); and for 
violating restraining and protective orders in June 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.e). SOR ¶ 1.f alleges the 
disposition of the November 2015 charges and does not represent an additional incident 
that could give rise to security concerns under Guideline J or Guideline E. 
 
 Applicant does not dispute that he was arrested as alleged, but he denies any 
validity to the charges. The charges were dismissed except with respect to the November 
2015 incident where Applicant maintains that he pleaded guilty to one count each of 
misdemeanor disorderly conduct and reckless endangerment under the Alford Doctrine to 
dispose of the charges and get on with his life. 
 
 Security concerns may arise even in the absence of a formal prosecution or 
conviction under AG ¶ 31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.”  Yet the AGs contemplate 
mitigation for unfounded allegations under ¶ 32(e) of Guideline J, “no reliable evidence to 
support that the individual committed the offense,” and AG ¶ 17(f), “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” Under ¶ E3.1.19 of the 
Directive, the evidentiary rules are relaxed. Even so, Applicant’s concerns about the 
hearsay nature of the claims of his ex-girlfriend to the police have some merit. Under ¶ 
3.1.22 of the Directive, statements adverse to an applicant on a controverted issue may be 
considered without an opportunity at cross-examination only in limited circumstances, none 
of which were not established in this case. 
 
 At the same time, police reports are admissible under ¶ E3.1.20. In determining 
whether credible evidence of criminal conduct or personal conduct exists, I note that 
Applicant’s present account of some of the incidents varies in several significant aspects 
from his more contemporaneous statements to the police, who are presumed to have 
acted within the scope of their duties. There is no evidence of any apparent motive on the 
part of the police to fabricate their report of what Applicant told them. As discussed below, 
Applicant made admissions to the police or at his security clearance hearing that are alone 
sufficient to establish criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
 There is no police report of the April 2009 incident in the record. Applicant admits 
that he yelled at his now ex-wife’s boyfriend and “made a statement to him that if [he] didn’t 
get off [his] property [he’d] rip his head off.” That statement that could reasonably be 
considered threatening. Regarding the September 2014 charges of risk of injury to a child, 
disorderly conduct, and reckless endangerment, Applicant told the police that he became 
upset at discovering that his ex-girlfriend planned to take all of their daughter’s belongings. 
He asserts that he had his daughter properly restrained in his truck, although a 
disinterested witness heard someone yell that the girl was not restrained. Applicant does 
not dispute that he drove his truck down the road with his daughter in the backseat and his 
12 
 
ex-girlfriend’s stepfather in the truck bed pounding on the roof. Even assuming that he had 
permission from his ex-girlfriend to take their daughter to the store, his operation of his 
truck under the circumstances was reckless, and he risked potentially serious injury to his 
young daughter. 
 
 As a result of that incident, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend obtained a protective order 
against him. As a condition of that protective order, he was required to surrender any 
firearms in his possession. He maintains that he thought he was in compliance by turning 
over his firearm, a family heirloom, to his friend Mr. X. However, the police report indicates 
that, before the gun was turned over, Applicant argued with the police about the gun laws, 
claimed to the police that he could not recall the surname of Mr. X, and had Mr. X give the 
firearm to his brother because he was a “federal employee.” Applicant recounted the 
incident on direct examination at his security clearance hearing as follows: 
 
I told them I didn’t have my firearm. I told them who I turned my firearm over 
to. I gave them the contact information of the friend that I turned it over and 
then I signed a form that was provided to me so I can make a statement of 
who I turned the firearm over to. (Tr. 52.) 
 
His account of the incident was incomplete and disingenuous. The firearm was eventually 
turned in by Applicant’s brother, but only after Applicant had been given several 
opportunities to comply. 
 
 Applicant submits that the November 2015 charges were disposed of by Alford plea. 
The judicial court record shows that he entered a guilty plea. Assuming that he entered an 
Alford plea, an Alford plea enables a defendant to enter a guilty plea while maintaining his 
or her innocence. However, before a court can accept an Alford plea, the defendant must 
admit that there is sufficient evidence to prove his or her guilt, and the court, in turn, must 
satisfy itself that the plea is supported by facts sufficient to sustain a conviction. See North 
Carolina v. Alford, supra, 400 U.S., at 37-39; ISCR Case No. 07-03307 at 7-8 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2008).2 A conviction based on an Alford plea has the same collateral estoppel 
effect as a conviction based on a guilty plea. Blohm v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 
994 F.2d 1542, 1553-55 (11th Cir. 1993). See ISCR Case No. 96-0525 (App. Bd. June 17, 
1997). Applicant’s plea to disorderly conduct and reckless endangerment is sufficient to 
raise criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. Moreover, while his ex-
girlfriend may have been unreasonably distraught, Applicant has not persuaded me that he 
was completely without blame in the incident. He told the police that he threw water at his 
ex-girlfriend in an attempt to calm her down. He then went upstairs to calm his older 
daughter and found the door locked. He pushed the door open, which caused the glass 
dish to fall from the dresser. At his security clearance hearing, he claimed discrepantly that 
the door to his daughter’s room was unlocked. He maintains that his ex-girlfriend over-
                                                 
2 In ruling on the court’s acceptance of an Alford plea, the appeals court in Crowfoot v. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 761 F.2d 661 at 665, at n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 1985) stressed that a court that receives an Alford plea 
“must independently determine that the plea has a factual basis.” Alford pleas differ slightly from a nolo 
contendere plea, in which the defendant agrees to accept the court’s findings and sentence without admitting 
guilt, and the evidence is sufficient to establish guilt.  
13 
 
reacted, and he had moved on and was only comforting his daughter. He admitted, 
however, that he and his ex-girlfriend then argued in front of his daughter and his son. His 
explanation for why his daughter barricaded her door if she did not fear him, that his 
daughter “always had an adverse reaction when anybody says the word blood,” is not 
persuasive. 
 
 After the November 2015 incident, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend obtained protective and 
restraining orders against him. He was arrested in June 2016 for violating the orders. He 
had replied to a telephone call of May 7, 2016, from a number he claimed not to recognize 
as belonging to his ex-girlfriend. When asked about the incident by the police, Applicant 
denied calling her. He later claimed that he had not spoken to her out of court, but the 
police had a screen shot from Applicant’s ex-girlfriend’s telephone showing a phone call 
from his number lasting more than five minutes.  He denies any intentional violation of the 
protective and restraining orders, claiming that he thought he was returning a call from the 
husband of a family friend. He testified that he talked to his daughter for a couple of 
minutes and that he proved his case in court so the charges were dismissed. If Applicant 
had talked to his daughter, which was apparently permitted by family court order, it stands 
to reason that he would have told the police that he had spoken to his daughter if he did 
so. 
 
 The evidence is sufficient to establish AG ¶ 31(a) through AG ¶ 31(c) under 
Guideline J, which provide: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely 
to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast 
doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, or admission, 
and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 AG ¶ 31(c) was applicable as of the close of the evidentiary record. Applicant was 
still on supervised probation for the November 2015 disorderly conduct and reckless 
endangerment offenses. 
 
 Under the personal conduct guideline, the Government argued for the applicability of 
AG ¶ 16(d)(3), which provides: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
14 
 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This includes, but is 
not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(d)(3) does not strictly apply because the conduct of security concern is 
explicitly covered under Guideline J. However, Applicant repeatedly exhibited very poor 
judgment to trigger the concerns under AG ¶ 15. 
 
 The criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines similarly provide for mitigation 
when the offense occurred so long ago or under usual circumstances that it is no longer of 
security concern. AG ¶ 32(a) under Guideline J states: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) under Guideline E states: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior is too recurrent and recent for mitigation under either 
AG ¶ 32(a) or AG ¶ 17(c), even though he and the women (first wife and ex-girlfriend) 
involved in the domestic disputes are no longer in his life other than as mothers to his 
children. Applicant has remarried, but he was still on probation for the November 2015 
offenses as of the close of the evidentiary record. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(d) under Guideline J and AG ¶ 17(d) under Guideline E address 
rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) has some applicability in that there has been no recurrence of the 
criminal conduct since 2016; he has shown dedication, reliability, and trustworthiness in his 
defense-contractor employment; and he was in compliance with the terms of his probation. 
AG ¶ 32(d) provides: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including , but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s remarriage is a positive step that minimizes the risk of recurrence under AG ¶ 
17(d), which provides: 
 
15 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant has moved on from the relationships in which the criminal conduct 
occurred. He has completed anger management classes, a parenting class, and, as of the 
close of the evidentiary record, 25 of 26 sessions of a domestic violence class mandated 
by the court. Nonetheless, his reform is undermined by his persistent efforts to minimize his 
culpability even to the extent of now contradicting statements previously made to the 
police. The criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In the whole-person evaluation, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3 Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under 
Guidelines J and E, but some warrant additional comment. 
  
 Applicant’s military service weighs in his favor as does his unassailable dedication to 
his defense-contractor employment. However, he has a history of domestic incidents with 
both his first wife and an ex-girlfriend. He completed anger management in the military but 
it was not successful in preventing subsequent incidents with his ex-girlfriend. He did not 
allow the domestic discord at home to adversely affect his job performance with his 
defense-contractor employer. Yet it is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an 
applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). Applicant 
has exhibited an unacceptable tendency to minimize his culpability, causing doubts about 
whether his representations are reliable. He has not fully mitigated the doubts about his 
security worthiness. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
                                                 
3 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
16 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant4 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                 
4 A formal finding is made for Applicant because SOR ¶ 1.f alleges the disposition for the offense in SOR ¶ 1.d 
and is not another instance of criminal conduct. 
