 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
        )  ISCR Case No. 17-01877 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ernesto Gapasin, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 The creditor cancelled all of the delinquent debts listed on Applicant’s statement 
of reasons (SOR) in 2016. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 1, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). (Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
On June 27, 2017, and July 13, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On October 13, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On October 19, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On March 6, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for March 14, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the 
 
2 
                                         
 
date, time, and location of the hearing. (Tr. 8-9) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered six 
exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
(Tr. 16-19; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE F). On March 23, 2018, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript. One exhibit was provided after the hearing, and it was admitted 
without objection. (AE G) The record closed on May 15, 2018. (Tr. 69-72) 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations. (AE A) He 
also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (AE A)   
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old instructor and trainer in maintenance procedures and 
use of highly technical equipment. (Tr. 33-34) In 1972, he graduated from high school, 
and in 1977, he graduated from college with a bachelor of science degree in electrical 
engineering specializing in biomedical instrumentation. (Tr. 57-59) In 1979, he married, 
and his son is 32 years old. (Tr. 58) He did not serve in the military. (Tr. 58) He frequently 
travels overseas on behalf of his employer. (Tr. 34-35) He may be overseas for 10 of 12 
months in a year. (Tr. 45) He has worked for government contractors for 41 years, and 
he has held a security clearance for 40 years. (Tr. 35)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s annual income has been about $140,000 to $150,000 for the last three 
years. (Tr. 59-60) He has about $950,000 in his 401(k) account. (Tr. 61) Applicant paid 
off his original mortgage. (Tr. 37, 62) His taxes are current. (Tr. 37) His spouse handles 
the payments of the family debts. (Tr. 38) His only negative financial entries on his credit 
report are listed on the SOR. (Tr. 38) All of his accounts are current. (Tr. 46; AE D) He 
estimated his net worth to be close to $2,000,000. (Tr. 63) The first credit report he ever 
reviewed was the one provided as part of the security clearance process. (Tr. 39) When 
he purchased new vehicles in 2016 and 2018, his credit union did not say anything about 
negative entries on his credit report. (Tr. 54) Aside from the SOR allegations, Applicant 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
does not have any delinquent debts. (AE C; AE D; AE G) His credit report score is 756, 
which is excellent. (AE E) 
 
The SOR alleges four charged-off delinquent debts totaling about $97,000 owed 
to the same bank for $30,598, $26,387, $20,721, and $19,498.  
 
From 2003 to 2007, Applicant’s son attended an expensive private school and a 
state college. (Tr. 22-23; AE A) He funded his education with private (not guaranteed by 
the government) student loans. (Tr. 23, 42) Applicant cosigned on the student loans with 
his son. (Tr. 24-26, 41; AE A) After his son graduated, Applicant’s spouse put money into 
his son’s bank account to enable him to make the student-loan payments for a time 
because his son was somewhat irresponsible. (Tr. 50-51) His son subsequently took over 
the student-loan payments. (AE A) His son made payments; however, when the amount 
of the required monthly payments reached $800 around 2009, Applicant’s son defaulted 
on the student loans. (Tr. 24, 26; AE A) He did not tell his father about defaulting on the 
student loans. (Tr. 24; AE A)  
 
The first time Applicant learned about the negative entries on his credit report was 
during his 2017 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI). 
(Tr. 55-56) Applicant asked his son about the loans, and his son admitted that he 
defaulted on the loans. (Tr. 24, 56) His son said at Applicant’s hearing that he told 
Applicant the loans were forgiven. (Tr. 24, 27) The creditor told Applicant’s son that they 
were not seeking payment of the loans. (Tr. 27) Applicant’s son most recently checked 
with the creditor in 2015, and a bank employee advised Applicant’s son that the creditor 
could not legally accept payment. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant had no knowledge that the loans 
were in default until the security clearance process. (Tr. 43-44) 
 
Applicant said he was willing to contact the creditor after the hearing and settle the 
SOR debts. (Tr. 61) He said if the creditor will permit a payment plan, he will set up a 
payment plan. (Tr. 66) 
 
After the hearing, the creditor provided some information from archives. In two 
letters both dated February 25, 2014, the SOR creditor wrote to Applicant’s son and stated 
that two debts were settled for less than the full amount on February 25, 2014. The letters 
stated the credit bureaus would be informed that the accounts were “Paid in full, was a 
charge off.” (AE G at 6-7) 
 
The SOR creditor provided five letters all dated August 18, 2016, addressed to 
Applicant’s son stating that a review of accounts indicated the statute of limitations may 
have expired, and the five debts in the amounts of $19,498, $26,387, $30,598, $35,517, 
and $20,721 were cancelled. (AE G at 1-5) The creditor’s letter indicated the creditor 
“decided to make no further attempts to collect” these debts; the balance owed on each 
debt is now zero; and the creditor may issue an IRS Form 1099 for none, some, or all of 
the debts. (AE G at 1-5)  
 
Applicant’s performance reviews from 2015 to 2017 indicate he is an excellent 
employee who contributes to mission accomplishment. (Tr. 47-48; AE F)  
 
4 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5 
                                         
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
The SOR alleges four student-loan charged-off debts totaling about $97,000. 
Applicant cosigned with his son for the four student loans. Applicant’s son told Applicant 
that he was making payments, and subsequently, that the loans were forgiven. 
Applicant’s spouse handled the family finances while he was overseas, and Applicant 
was unaware that his son defaulted on the payments. These are circumstances beyond 
his control that adversely affected his finances.  
 
Applicant’s SOR indicates all four delinquent debts are in charged-off status on his 
credit report. A “charged-off debt” is an accounting entry. A creditor considers a debt owed 
to the creditor to be an asset. When the value of the asset is in doubt, the creditor is 
required to change the status of the debt to reflect its current status. When the debt 
appears to be uncollectible, the creditor should change the status for accounting purposes 
from being an asset to charged off. Notwithstanding the change to charged-off status, a 
creditor may still sell the debt to a collection agent, and the debtor may still pay or settle 
the debt. Eventually, the charged-off debts will be dropped from the debtor’s credit report. 
“[T]hat some debts have dropped off his [or her] credit report is not meaningful evidence 
of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires 
removal of most negative financial items from a credit report seven years from the first 
date of delinquency or the debt becoming collection barred because of a state statute of 
limitations, whichever is longer.4 Debts may be dropped from a credit report upon dispute 
when creditors believe the debt is not going to be paid, a creditor fails to timely respond 
to a credit reporting company’s request for information, or when the debt has been 
charged off. “Mere evidence that debts no longer appear on credit reports is not reason 
to believe that they are not legitimate or that they have been satisfactorily resolved.” ISCR 
Case No. 16-02941 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015)).  
 
The SOR creditor provided five letters dated August 18, 2016, addressed to 
Applicant’s son stating that a review of accounts indicated the statute of limitations may 
have expired, and five debts in the amounts of $19,498, $26,387, $30,598, $35,517, and 
$20,721 were cancelled. The creditor “decided to make no further attempts to collect” 
these debts; the balance owed on each debt is now zero; and the creditor may issue an 
IRS Form 1099s. Four of the five debts correspond to debts listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant showed due diligence after his hearing in contacting the creditor and 
finding out what happened to the student-loan debts. He was willing to settle the debts; 
however, the creditor is not accepting payments as the debts were resolved in August 
2016. All of Applicant’s other accounts are current. He has an excellent credit score. 
There are clear indications that his financial problem is resolved, and his finances are 
                                            
4Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit 
Reporting Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-
act.pdf. 
 
8 
                                         
 
under control. Future financial problems are unlikely to occur. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 
20(d) are established, and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old instructor and trainer in maintenance procedures and 
use of highly technical equipment. In 1977, he graduated from college with a bachelor of 
science degree in electrical engineering specializing in biomedical instrumentation. He 
has worked for government contractors for 41 years, and he has held a security clearance 
for 40 years. There is no evidence of criminal conduct, use of illegal drugs, or security 
violations.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling about $97,000. The creditor 
wrote Applicant’s son, who was primarily responsible for the debts, and advised him the 
debts were cancelled. The creditor said the balance owed is zero. Applicant’s son may 
owe federal income taxes on the cancelled debts. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
 
9 
                                         
 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a track record of paying his debts. 
 
Applicant does not have any delinquent debts. His actions show financial 
responsibility and judgment and favorably resolve questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Future financial 
problems are unlikely to occur.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are mitigated, and it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
