 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03873 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a December 31, 
2017, response, he admitted the sole allegation and offered additional information. He 
also requested a determination based on the written record. On January 31, 2018, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with four attachments (“Items”). I 
was assigned the case on May 10, 2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I 
find Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old male being sponsored for a security clearance by a 
defense contractor. He was most recently employed as a film coating technician. 
Applicant has been continuously employed for at least the past dozen years. He attended 
high school and has taken some junior college courses. He has been married since 2014.  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
As based on materials contained in the FORM, the SOR sets forth one allegation 
(SOR § 1.a) pertaining to a finance-related security issue, which Applicant admitted: 
 
Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2003 through 
2012 in a timely fashion. As of the date of the November 2016 SOR, the tax 
returns for tax years 2003, 2004, 2010, 2011, and 2012 remain unfiled.2 
 
By way of explanation, Applicant wrote that he was initially under the belief that the 
filing of a federal tax return was only required if an individual owed money, and that filing 
after four years “yields no return.”3 (SOR Answer) Noting that he has filed responsibly for 
the past four years, he does not understand why information going beyond a seven year 
window is now being investigated or how it could be deemed applicable.4  
 
There is a history to Applicant’s failure of not timely filing federal tax returns. 
Applicant was previously investigated for a security clearance in 2010. During a 2010 
personal subject interview, his failure to file federal tax returns from 2001 to 2009 was 
discussed. There, he was advised of the importance of, and the requirement to, timely file 
federal income tax returns - regardless of whether he owed taxes. (FORM, Item 4)  
 
In completing his April 2016 SCA, Applicant failed to disclose his past failures to 
timely file federal tax returns, including those that went unfiled in the preceding seven 
years (ie. Unfiled tax returns for 2010-2012). (FORM, Item 3, at 39) During a December 
2016 personal subject interview, Applicant offered that he was not required to disclose 
his past failures to timely file federal tax returns because they were not within the seven 
year window contemplated in the question, despite the fact three of those years (2010-
2012) were clearly within that timeframe.5 Most recently, in his March 26, 2018, FORM 
Response, Applicant wrote that he was “currently taking steps to file all unfiled tax returns 
through a CPA [certified public accountant].” 
 
Other than a 2016 automobile repossession, which he self-reported, Applicant is 
living within his means. He retains an average net monthly remainder of $500 after all 
expenses. He reported that he is fiscally responsible and not overextended. (FORM 
Response) He has approximately $40,000 in a retirement fund. Applicant loves his work 
                                                          
2 During his 2016 personal subject interview, Applicant reported that he had filed a federal tax return for 
every year since 2010 except for 2012, when he was “distracted.”  (FORM, Item 4, at 11) In answering the 
SOR, however, he admitted that he had failed to file federal tax returns for 2010-2012. (SOR Response) 
 
3 “The very first time [Applicant] filed a tax return prior to 2001, he only got a refund of $1 and this was a 
contributing factor to his not filing returns. He felt he was not going to get enough back to make it worth the 
effort.” (FORM, Item 4, at 11) 
 
4 Section 26 of the security clearance application (SCA) asks, in part: “In the last seven years have you 
failed to file or pay Federal . . . taxes when required by law or ordinance?” Applicant answered “no.” (form, 
Item 3, at 38) 
 
5 During the interview, Applicant reported that he had eventually filed federal tax returns for tax years 2006-
2009, and received a refund of approximately $4,000. No documentary evidence of these filings was offered 
in this proceeding. 
 
 
 
 
3 
and this country. He also notes his support for the United States military, in which his 
younger brother serves. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. This process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. Under the Directive, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends duty 
hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately 
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions shall be in terms 
of the national interest and are in no sense a determination as to an applicant’s loyalty.  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2003 through 2012. He also admitted that, as of the date of the November 2017 
SOR, tax returns for tax years 2003, 2004, 2010, 2011, and 2012 remained unfiled. Such 
facts are sufficient to raise financial considerations disqualifying condition:  
 
 
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Based on the documentary evidence, Applicant failed to timely file federal tax 
returns for multiple years. He learned of his obligation to timely file such returns during a 
2010 investigation. He only offered an excuse (“distraction”) for failing to timely file a 
federal tax return for only one tax year, 2012. As of his March 2018, FORM Response, 
there is no documentation reflecting progress by Applicant or his CPA on the tax returns 
at issue. Due to this lack of evidence, no mitigating condition applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant is a 36-year-old male who has been continuously employed for at least 
the past 12 years. He attended high school and some junior college courses. Applicant 
has been married since 2014. With the exception of a 2016 auto repossession, he has 
been living within his means and retaining a net monthly remainder after all expenses of 
about $500. He is loyal to the United States and supports the military, in which his brother 
serves.  
 
The evidence of record shows that Applicant has known he had the obligation to 
file timely federal tax refunds, regardless of whether he was owed a refund, since at least 
2010. He also should have been aware after his 2010 personal subject interview that 
fulfilling that obligation was expected of an individual seeking to be granted or maintain a 
security clearance. Despite this knowledge, Applicant continued to fail in filing federal tax 
returns until at least 2014.  
 
To date, tax returns for the neglected tax years have not been filed. Judging such 
behavior under the whole-person analysis, this repeated failure poses serious security 
concerns regarding Applicant’s judgment and ability to honor laws and regulations, as 
well as civic responsibilities. This assessment included Applicant’s tax filing history, both 
within and outside the seven year timeframe referenced in SCA § 26. Applicant’s 
documentation failed to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns raised. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
