1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 17-00774 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern generated 
by her delinquent debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility. The DOD 
CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the 
allegations except subparagraph 1.c. She requested a hearing, whereupon the case was 
assigned to me on December 4, 2017. On March 12, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings 
 
2 
 
and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for March 28, 2018. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. I received two Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 2) 
and 15 Applicant’s exhibits (AE A - AE O). Also, I took administrative notice, at Department 
Counsel’s request, of the discovery letter mailed to Applicant on May 25, 2017. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on April 10, 2018. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 32-year-old single woman with two children, ages eight and one. She 
is a high school graduate and has been working as a security specialist since 2007. She 
has held a security clearance since that time. (Tr. 12-13) She has worked for her current 
employer since 2015. (Tr. 13) 
 
 In June 2013, Applicant purchased a car. (GE 2 at 2) At that time she earned an 
$85,000 per year salary. She made the monthly car payments timely for the next six 
months. Then, in June 2014, her employer terminated her employment. (Tr. 15) Although 
Applicant obtained another job within a month, it was $40,000 less than her previous 
salary. (Tr. 15) Consequently, Applicant continued to look for a job with a salary in the pay 
range to which she was accustomed.  
 
 Applicant subsequently found a higher-paying job; however, it was still $25,000 less 
than the job that she lost in June 2014. (Tr. 15) Applicant was laid off from this new job 
after about four months. (Tr. 15) By then, she had begun to fall behind on her car note and 
her other bills. Unable to afford continued car payments, she voluntarily surrendered it to 
the dealer. (Tr. 15) The dealer sold it, leaving a deficiency of approximately $8,700, owed 
to the credit union that financed the deal, which remains outstanding, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. (Tr. 15) 
 
 The car note deficiency totals approximately half of the amount of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts, as alleged in the remainder of the SOR. Initially in 2015, Applicant 
considered filing for bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 41) Unable to afford the $1,300 retainer 
fee, she decided to forego filing bankruptcy until she had saved the money. In 2017, she 
contacted the attorney and told him she was going to attempt to satisfy the debts rather 
than discharge them through the bankruptcy process. (Tr. 43) In February 2018, she 
negotiated a payment plan to satisfy the deficiency owed to the credit union that financed 
the automobile that was voluntarily repossessed. Per the agreement, the credit union also 
included another debt that Applicant owed, as alleged in subparagraph 1.d, totaling $944. 
Under the plan, Applicant was to begin paying $50 per month for the first six months of the 
3 
 
agreement. Then, the bank would renegotiate the payment amount. (AE B) Applicant made 
her first payment, as agreed, on February 21, 2018. (AE C)  
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.b, totaling $4,462, constitutes delinquent rent 
payments. Per an agreement with the creditor, Applicant is to satisfy the debt with $50 
monthly payments for six months, after which the creditor would renegotiate the payment 
terms. (AE D) The first payment was due on March 22, 2018. The record contains no 
evidence that Applicant made this payment. Applicant had negotiated a payment plan with 
this creditor approximately five months earlier, in October 2017. (AE A) There is no record 
evidence that she had made any payments between October 2017 and March 2018.  
 
 Applicant initially denied the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.c, totaling $1,461. 
Research confirmed that it was a loan she used to finance the purchase of tires for her car. 
(Tr. 37) She has yet to make payment arrangements. 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.g are medical debts, totaling $872. Applicant contends 
that she paid them, but provided no documentary proof.  (Tr. 41)  
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.f, totaling $520, is a phone bill. Applicant has 
not contacted this creditor yet. (Tr. 41) 
 
 In February 2017, Applicant contacted a credit repair agency. (Tr. 43) Dissatisfied 
with their services, she retained another credit repair agency in August 2017. (Tr. 44) They 
are helping her resolve the SOR debts. Applicant has approximately $20,000 invested in a 
retirement account. (Tr. 47) She has a minimal amount of after-expense disposable 
income. (Tr. 48) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation or other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant’s ongoing financial problems trigger the application of AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began after she was laid off from her job in June 
2014. Although she was subsequently unemployed for less than a month, she has yet to 
earn a salary as high as the one she was earning before the layoff. I conclude her financial 
problems were caused by circumstances beyond her control. 
 
 Applicant retained a credit repair agency to help identify debts and develop payment 
plans. Although she has developed some payment plans, she has only made two 
documented debt payments a $25 payment to the creditor that holds the automobile 
deficiency, and a $50 payment to a credit union. Similarly, she contends that she has paid 
the medical bills alleged in subparagraphs 1.e and 1.g, but provided no concrete 
documentary evidence.  Under these circumstances, she has not met her burden to 
establish that any of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Applicant has made some efforts to resolve her financial problems. Moreover, her 
inability to make any significant progress at debt reduction stems from a lack of available 
disposable income. However, she failed to document the marginal progress that she 
contends that she has made. Under these circumstances, she has not met her burden of 
proving that her financial problems are no longer a security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
6 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
