KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant was granted a security clearance in 2015.  In 2016, he experienced
symptoms of depression, which he believed were not being adequately treated by his medication
and other medical treatments.  He decided to use marijuana with his friend.  Soon thereafter, he
purchased marijuana, took it with him on a business trip, and used it two mornings before
business meetings.  He also purchased drug paraphernalia on that trip. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02236.a1
DATE: 07/02/2018
DATE: July 2, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02236
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Anthony L Ciuca, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 19, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 26, 2018, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric H. Borgstrom denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He was granted a security
clearance in 2015.  In 2016, he experienced symptoms of depression, which he believed were not
being adequately treated by his medication and other medical treatments.  A close friend
recommended that he use marijuana to self-medicate.  After reviewing scientific studies, he decided
to use marijuana with his friend.  Soon thereafter, he purchased marijuana, took it with him on a
business trip, and used it two mornings before business meetings.  He also purchased drug
paraphernalia on that trip.  Hotel personnel confronted him about his marijuana use.  Concerned that
hotel personnel would notify his employer about such conduct, he preemptively informed his
supervisor.  He was immediately sent home, indefinitely suspended, subjected to random drug tests,
and required to attend counseling.  He failed three drug tests in a three-month period in mid-2016. 
He subsequently successfully passed several random drug tests over the next 12 months.  He
estimated that he used marijuana five times over a two-month period in 2016.  When he used
marijuana, Applicant knew his conduct was illegal and would negatively impact his security
clearance eligibility.  He is still in contact with his friend with whom he used marijuana.  His
supervisor has a high opinion of his work performance. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The circumstances and recency of Applicant’s drug use while granted a security clearance 
cast doubt on his reliability, good judgment, and ability to safeguard classified information.  His 18-
month abstinence and statement of intent to abstain from future marijuana use do not mitigate the
security concerns arising from his repeated marijuana use while holding a security clearance.  
Discussion
In the appeal brief, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in failing to apply the factors in 
Enclosure 2, Appendix A ¶ 2(f) of the Directive, i.e., factors that an adjudicator should consider
when security concerns become known about an individual who is eligible to access classified
information.   We do not find this argument persuasive.  First, we note that the Judge made findings
2
about most of the facts that Applicant has identified as supporting application of those factors. 
Second, as we have previously stated, a Judge is not required to discuss all of the analytical factors
set forth in the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06135 at 2, n.1 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016).  
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant failed to mitigate
the security concerns.  In doing so, he notes the Judge failed to mention Applicant’s volunteer work
and argues that the Judge essentially dismissed his period of abstinence and statement of intent. 
These arguments essentially amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence
and are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record nor enough to establish that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-06494 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 5,
2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
