 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-01482 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
parent’s residence and work in Lebanon supporting a non-governmental, human rights 
organization. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the foreign influence guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The hearing was originally 
scheduled for February 22, 2018, but, at Applicant’s request, was rescheduled for March 
8, 2018. The hearing was convened on the re-scheduled date. Applicant and his father 
testified. The exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the record without 
objection.1 The transcript of the hearing was received on March 5, 2018, and the record 
closed on April 6, 2018.2 
  
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – D.  
 
2 Department Counsel’s discovery letter, prehearing correspondence, and post-hearing matters are 
attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – III, respectively.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 22, was born in the United States. His father is a U.S.-born citizen. His 
mother is a dual citizen of Lebanon and the United States, who was born in Lebanon. 
Applicant is their only child. Applicant’s parents work for a Christian-based human rights 
organization (HRO) and are currently assigned to Lebanon.3 
 
 Applicant and his parents lived in the United States until about 2004, when his 
parents decided to join the HRO. The family then moved overseas, living primarily in the 
Middle East. Before moving, Applicant’s parents went through the HRO’s internal security 
briefings and training. They also agreed to a detailed, written emergency action plan. The 
plan covers a number of exigencies, including kidnapping. The plan calls for appropriate 
notifications and several HRO officials, both inside and outside the foreign country where 
Applicant’s parents are assigned, are responsible for providing assistance and making 
the necessary notifications. Applicant’s parents receive refresher security briefing and 
training through the HRO each year, and the emergency action plan is also reviewed and, 
if necessary, revised on an annual basis.4  
 
Applicant’s uncle, who served for several years as a local public official for a large 
U.S. county, notes that the emergency action plan was put into effect during one particular 
period of instability and unrest in the Middle East. He recalls that, although Applicant and 
his family were not in any immediate danger, as a precautionary measure, the HRO 
withdrew Applicant and his family from the foreign country. They were able to return to 
the United States without issue, and only returned to the foreign country after the matters 
that raised a concern had passed.5  
 
Applicant testified that he and his parents have discussed the potential risks 
associated with their current situation. If someone would attempt to influence him through 
his parents, Applicant would immediately report any such attempts to his employer’s 
security office and the appropriate U.S. Government authorities.6 He went on to explain 
that his parents taught him to “do my duty to my country, and [in such a situation] . . . . 
not only would they want me to, but if they could they would instruct me to contact my 
facility security officer and the authorities.”7 
 
From 2005 to 2014, Applicant attended schools overseas with other children 
originally from the United States, the United Kingdom, and other Western countries. After 
graduating from high school, Applicant decided he wanted to return home to study and 
                                                          
3 Tr. 44-46; Answer; Exhibits 1 – 2; Exhibit A at 1-2.  
 
4 Tr. 44-48; Exhibit D.  
 
5 Exhibit A at 11.  
 
6 Tr. 51-53.  
 
7 Tr. 56-57.  
 
3 
 
live in the United States. He applied to and was accepted by a college in the United 
States.8  
 
 Applicant has excelled in college, academically and otherwise. He accepted an 
offer from a large defense contractor to work for the company during his summer breaks. 
The company has offered him a full-time position and placed him in its leadership training 
program.9 
 
In 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in connection 
with his employment by the defense contractor. Applicant fully reported his foreign 
connections and contacts on the SCA. He then discussed them, as well as other aspects 
of his background, during his security clearance background investigation.10 He was 
subsequently granted an interim security clearance to work as a college intern for the 
defense contractor. While so employed, Applicant dutifully reported to the defense 
contractor’s security office a chance encounter he had with someone who he later learned 
was a foreign government official.11 The Director of Security Services for the large 
defense contractor noted that Applicant’s report of the encounter was “appropriate and 
diligent.”12  
 
Numerous individuals associated with the HRO or the church that Applicant and 
his family attended in the United States, and who have remained close to the family, 
provided letters in support. These letters note Applicant’s maturity, immense work ethic; 
high moral standards, charitable work from an early age, and conscientiousness about 
protecting the identity of others in sensitive situations. The captain of Applicant’s college-
sponsored engineering team states that Applicant is a natural leader, a good teammate, 
and a mentor to younger teammates. Applicant is actively involved with the team and 
other volunteer activities in his community. He has several close family members that live 
within close proximity to where he resides in the United States.13  
 
Administrative Notice – Lebanon14 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary republic. Lebanon's history since 1943 has been 
marked by periods of political turmoil interspersed with prosperity. The United States 
seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon, and to help preserve its 
independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. In a recent country 
                                                          
8 Tr. 44-48.  
 
9 Tr. 48-50.  
 
10 Exhibits 1 – 2.  
 
11 Tr. 50-51.  
 
12 Exhibit B.  
 
13 Exhibit A.  
 
14 See generally Exhibit 3, as updated by current documents posted on the U.S. State Department website 
(state.gov) and are appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit IV. 
 
4 
 
report on terrorism, the U.S. State Department noted that Lebanon was a committed 
partner in the counter-ISIS fight, and its ground forces represented one of the most 
effective counterterrorism forces in the region. U.S. forces partnered closely with 
Lebanon’s defense and law enforcement security apparatus as Lebanon continued to 
face significant internal and external terrorist threats. 
 
The following additional relevant facts, which are taken from official, publically-
available U.S. Government reports, are hereby accepted for administrative notice:  
 
1. Lebanon’s civil authorities maintained control over the armed forces and other 
security forces. However, Palestinian security and militia forces, the designated 
foreign terrorist organization Hizballah, and other extremist elements operated 
outside the direction or control of government officials. Hizballah, with 
considerable support from Iran, retained significant influence over parts of the 
country and remained the most capable terrorist group in Lebanon. 
 
2. The U.S. State Department’s current travel warning for Lebanon states that 
U.S. citizens should reconsider or avoid travel to particular areas in Lebanon 
because of the threats of terrorism, armed clashes, kidnapping, and outbreaks 
of violence, especially near Lebanon’s borders with Syria and Israel. Violent 
extremist groups operate in Lebanon, including U.S. government-designated 
terrorist organizations. U.S. citizens have been the targets of terrorist attacks 
in Lebanon in the past, and terrorist groups continue plotting possible attacks 
in Lebanon.  
 
3. The travel warning goes on to state that the Lebanese government cannot 
guarantee the protection of U.S. citizens against sudden outbreaks of violence. 
Kidnapping, whether for ransom, political motives, or family disputes, has 
occurred in Lebanon. Suspects in kidnappings may have ties to terrorist or 
criminal organizations. 
 
4. The U.S. State Department’s current human rights report reflects credible 
reports detailing the commission of serious human rights abuses in Lebanon, 
including arbitrary and unlawful killings by government forces and non-state 
actors. Although Lebanon’s legal structure provides for prosecution and 
punishment, enforcement remained a problem, and government officials 
enjoyed a measure of impunity for human rights abuses. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
5 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
DOHA administrative judges “are creatures of the Directive,”15 who derive their 
authority from the Directive. The Directive also sets forth an administrative judge’s 
responsibilities and obligations, including the requirement that a judge remain fair and 
impartial, and carefully balance the needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the 
demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: 
(a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 
12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).16 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 17-01213, n. 2 (App. Bd. June 29, 2018). 
 
16 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
6 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an applicant, 
at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines established for 
determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.17  
 
 In assessing the foreign influence security concern, I considered all disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
                                                          
17 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with foreign relatives faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in 
mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to 
sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified 
information.”18 However, what factor or combination of factors will mitigate security 
concerns raised by an applicant with relatives in a foreign country is not easily identifiable 
or quantifiable.19 Furthermore, a heightened level of scrutiny is warranted when an 
applicant’s relatives with whom they have a close relationship reside in a hostile foreign 
country or a country where elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate 
somewhat freely.20 
 
 Here, Applicant has a close relationship to his parents. It is not a mere hypothetical 
concern that if hostile elements within Lebanon became aware of Applicant’s position as 
a cleared U.S. Government contractor that they would attempt to leverage his close 
relationship with his parents for their own advantage and purposes. This situation clearly 
raises a heightened security concern. Nonetheless, after considering and weighing the 
evidence, I find that Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign 
influence concern. Specifically, I find that Applicant established the above-listed mitigating 
conditions, in whole or in part. Of note: 
 
1. Applicant has already exhibited the security conscientiousness required of all 
clearance holders. He dutifully reported to his employer’s security office a chance 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
20 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
8 
 
encounter with a foreign government official. He fully documented his foreign 
connections and contacts on his SCA, and he was upfront and candid throughout 
the security clearance process. This evidence leads me to conclude that Applicant 
can be trusted to report any attempts to influence him through his parents.  
 
2. His parents’ work and residence in Lebanon is a temporary situation and, more 
importantly, they and their employer have put in place appropriate safeguards and 
plans of action in case a serious issue were to arise. 
 
3. Applicant’s strong connections and ties to the United States, which continue to 
grow and deepen with each passing day.  
 
Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline B case 
this assessment necessarily requires a judge to consider the relevant country or countries 
at issue. After considering and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I 
find that Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
