1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 17-00683 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern generated 
by his delinquent debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 3, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility. The DOD 
CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 25, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations. He 
requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. On 
March 13, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, 
 
2 
 
scheduling Applicant’s case for April 11, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. I 
received three Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 3) and one Applicant exhibit (AE A). Also, 
I took administrative notice, at Department Counsel’s request, of the discovery letter mailed 
to Applicant on May 25, 2017 (Hearing Exhibit I). At the close of the hearing, I left the 
record open, at Applicant’s request, for him to submit additional exhibits. Department 
Counsel did not object. Within the time allotted, Applicant submitted 11 exhibits that I 
incorporated into the record as AE B through AE L. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
April 11, 2018. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 48-year-old married man with three children, ages 18, 13, and 9.  He 
is a high school graduate and has earned some college credits. He has been working for a 
defense contractor since 2012. Currently, he is a senior logistics and program analyst. 
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to the chief executive officer of 
the company, his “performance has always met or exceeded expectations and he is 
deemed trustworthy, competent, diligent, and responsible by customers and colleagues.” 
(Answer at 4) His client is fortunate to have him on the team. (AE K at 4) 
 
 Applicant is a veteran of the U.S. Navy, enlisting in 1995 and serving through his 
honorable discharge in the summer of 2010. Applicant intended to serve in the Navy until 
he was retirement eligible; however, after he struggled for years with weight control 
problems, the Navy opted not to renew his contract.  
 
 Applicant and his wife had not planned financially on an early exit from the Navy. 
(Answer at 1) Nevertheless, they began adjusting to civilian life, as Applicant gained a job 
in November 2010, approximately four months after his discharge. (GE 1 at 12) Applicant 
worked at his first post-Navy job for approximately 21 months before being laid off in 
August 2012. (Tr. 21) He was then unemployed for three months before obtaining his 
current job in December 2012. 
 
 Because Applicant’s new job was located in another state, he had to relocate. He 
was unable to sell the home in the state from where he had moved because the mortgage 
balance exceeded the fair market value. (Tr. 17) Consequently, Applicant rented the home. 
Over the years, tenants paid rent erratically. Ultimately, this strained Applicant’s finances, 
and he fell behind on the mortgage payments. 
 
3 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant’s troubles paying the mortgage were temporarily ameliorated 
after he successfully applied for a loan modification. (Tr. 27) Approximately a year later, 
Applicant discovered that the home had significant mold damage, requiring costly repairs.  
As of the date of the SOR, Applicant was approximately $1,698 behind on his mortgage 
payment, as alleged in subparagraph 1.b. Currently, he is attempting to short sell the 
home. (Tr. 27)  He has not made any mortgage payments since the fall of 2017.   
 
 Applicant is delinquent on his state income taxes for tax year 2014, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a, in the amount of $2,700. This debt remains outstanding, and he has yet 
to contact the state revenue authority to develop a payment plan. (Tr. 25)  
 
 Applicant is indebted to a credit union in the amount of $7,972, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.c. In March 2018, He contacted the creditor to initiate a payment plan. It 
appears that he made a payment, per AE A, but the amount is inconclusive. 
  
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.d, totaling $5,036, is a hardware store credit 
card. (Tr. 31)  Applicant contacted the creditor approximately a year ago, but has not 
followed up since then. (Tr. 31) 
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph1.e, totaling $1,212, is a loan for a dental bill. It 
remains unpaid. Applicant intends to begin paying it once he has satisfied the debt alleged 
in subparagraph 1.e. 
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.f, totaling $1,679, is a medical account. 
Applicant contends that he paid it, but provided no substantiating documentation. 
 
 In the fall of 2017, Applicant’s wife obtained a new job. (Tr. 19) The annual salary is 
approximately $15,000 higher than that of her previous job. (Tr. 24) Moreover, her job has 
better insurance coverage than Applicant’s job, enabling them to switch to her plan, saving 
$1,200 per month. (Tr. 24) Per their updated budget, they now have $3,523 of 
discretionary monthly income. (AE C)   
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
4 
 
and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation or other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 Applicant’s ongoing financial problems trigger the application of AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(f), 
“. . . .failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” The following 
mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stemmed from two lengthy periods of unemployment 
within the first three years after his discharge from the Navy, and they were exacerbated 
after he relocated to another area to pursue a new job, but was unable to sell his home. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant has prudently attempted to mitigate his losses from his property by renting 
it, modifying the loan, and attempting to short sell it. Its status remains unresolved. 
Similarly, the remaining SOR debts are either unresolved, or payments lack evidence of 
substantiation. Under these circumstances, none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Applicant is a highly-valued employee. His financial problems did not originate from 
foolish or profligate spending. Regardless of how he incurred the debt, he has the burden 
of proof to establish that his debts are under control. Although his wife’s higher-paying new 
job weighs in his favor when considering his ability to eliminate his delinquent 
indebtedness, he has provided minimal proof of any measurable progress. Under these 
circumstances, it is too soon to conclude that he will mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
