 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01654 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate financial responsibility, or that 
his financial problems are being resolved. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 18, 2015. He 
was interviewed by a government investigator on February 14, 2017. After reviewing the 
information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 7, 2017, alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on 
December 20, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
March 9, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on March 14, 2018. He was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
 
2 
 
 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on June 12, 2018. Lacking any objections, I admitted and considered 
the Government’s proposed evidence.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
February 14, 2017. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could 
make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and waived any objections. I 
admitted the FORM’s proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted the three SOR debts, but denied that his 
debts raised security concerns. He submitted comments and documents in mitigation. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He is a graduate of a service academy, and served 
honorably for seven years on active duty and three years in the Inactive Reserve. He 
married his wife in 1990, and they have two adult children, ages 24 and 22.  
 
Applicant provided no information concerning his employment between, when he 
was discharged from the service in 1998 and 2003, when he started working for federal 
contractors. Applicant worked for defense contractors between 2003 and December 
2013. He was unemployed between December 2013 and May 2015. He was hired by a 
federal contractor in May 2015, and by his current employer and clearance sponsor in 
June 2016. Applicant was granted a clearance while in the service in about 1989. It 
appears his clearance was continued to present, and he seeks the continuation of his 
clearance which is required for his work with his current employer.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his May 2015 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed he had financial problems related to his 16-month unemployment period from 
December 2013 through June 2015. He used his credit cards and withdrew money from 
his 401(k) retirement plan to pay for his living expenses. He was unable to pay his credit 
cards and some became delinquent, including the two alleged in the SOR. In 2014, he 
withdrew funds from his 401(k) retirement account and acquired a tax liability. The IRS 
filed a lien against him in 2014.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial problems in his 2015 SCA. During his February 
2017 interview, Applicant discussed with the government investigator his financial 
problems and the delinquent accounts that were later alleged in the SOR.  
 
In his SOR Answer, Applicant explained his delinquent debts resulted from 
circumstances beyond his control – his period of unemployment. However, he failed to 
explain the circumstances surrounding his unemployment. It is not clear whether he was 
fired for misconduct or he decided to quit, or was laid off, or terminated for other 
reasons. Applicant also averred he made good-faith efforts to repay his debts because 
he used his savings and retirement accounts to pay for his living expenses and some of 
his tax debts. Applicant further claimed he established payment plans to resolve the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. His documentary evidence is insufficient for me to 
conclude that he established such payment arrangements, or that he has been making 
regular payments in accordance with his payment arrangements.  
 
Attached to his SOR response, Applicant submitted documents showing he 
postdated two checks and presented them to the creditor collecting both accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b in August 2017. There is no evidence showing that the 
checks cleared, or that the payments were made pursuant to an existing payment 
arrangement, or that Applicant has been making consistent payments pursuant to an 
agreement.  
 
Concerning the tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant claimed in his 2015 SCA 
that he had “negotiated an abatement with the IRS through December 2015” because of 
his period of unemployment. In his 2017 SOR response, Applicant claimed the IRS 
issued him a “forbearance” while he recovered from his long-term unemployment, and 
that he established an installment agreement with the IRS to pay $381 monthly. 
Applicant’s documentary evidence failed to establish his claims.  
 
The IRS letter submitted (dated November 27, 2017), states that the IRS denied 
Applicant’s May 23, 2017 request for an installment agreement. The IRS wanted a 
larger monthly payment. Applicant apparently complied and submitted a request for an 
installment agreement for $381 monthly. The installment agreement request submitted 
by Applicant was dated December 2017. There is no evidence showing that Applicant 
has made any payments pursuant to the agreement. 
 
Applicant presented no evidence about his current financial situation (income, 
outstanding debts, whether his income is sufficient to pay for his living expenses, and 
whether his financial problems are resolved or under control). He gave no indication that 
he participated in financial counseling. I note, however, that the credit report in evidence 
shows Applicant settled and paid at least five other accounts not alleged in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
 
4 
 
 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. He was 
unemployed from December 2013 to June 2015, and acquired the three delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $64,000. AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) 
failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax are required”. The record 
established these disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
 
6 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of 
good-faith efforts to pay his debts or that he has been financially responsible under his 
circumstances.  
 
 After a period of unemployment, Applicant found employment in June 2015. He 
claimed in 2017 that he had established payment arrangements with his creditors, but 
failed to present documentary evidence to substantiate his claims. He presented 
evidence that he submitted two postdated checks to a credit collector, but it is not clear 
whether the checks cleared. He established an installment arrangement with the IRS in 
December 2017, but presented no evidence of any payments made following the 
agreement. 
 
 Applicant receives credit for settling and paying other accounts not alleged in the 
SOR. I also considered that Applicant’s period of unemployment likely created, 
contributed to, or aggravated his financial problem. However, there is no evidence 
explaining why Applicant was unemployed. If his unemployment period was due to his 
own misconduct, then his unemployment period could not be considered as a 
circumstance beyond his control. It is Applicant’s burden to explain the reasons for his 
unemployment and his inability to address his delinquent debts sooner.  
 
 In light of the lack of evidence concerning his efforts to resolve his debts, and 
lack of information about his current financial situation, Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to demonstrate financial responsibility, or that his financial problems are 
being resolved. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
 
7 
 
 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant, 51, honorably served 10 years in the service. He has been employed 
with federal contractors intermittently since 2003, and has held a clearance since 1989. 
His evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. It is well 
settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance. Unmitigated 
financial considerations security concerns lead me to conclude that granting a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his delinquent debts, a 
healthy financial picture, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, 
he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
