1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03659 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her illegal drug use and 
criminal behavior. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on January 3, 2018, 
and she elected a determination with a hearing. On May 25, 2018, a notice of hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for June 12, 2018. The hearing proceeded as 
scheduled. Applicant testified and submitted one document, which I admitted as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. Department Counsel submitted three documents, which 
I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript on June 25, 2018. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based upon Applicant’s illegal drug use, 
including while possessing a security clearance; two alcohol-related arrests; and two 
falsifications on her September 2015 security clearance application (SCA). In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in subparagraphs ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., 
2.a., and 2.b., and she denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 28 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in December 2012. 
Since June 2015, she has been employed as a contracts administrator for a DOD 
contractor. She was granted a DOD secret clearance in November 2015. She is not 
married, and she does not have any children.2 
 
 In June 2012, Applicant was arrested for and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI). She failed a field sobriety test, and her blood alcohol level was measured 
at 0.22. She attended court-ordered counseling, her driver’s license was suspended for 
seven months, and she was fined approximately $5,000.3  
 
 In October 2016, Applicant was involved in a car accident. Applicant had marijuana 
in her possession at the time of the accident. She tested positive for marijuana following 
the accident. She was arrested and charged with DUI and possession of marijuana; 
however, the DUI charge was reduced to reckless driving. She was placed on probation 
for one year, lost her driver’s license for three months, and paid approximately $2,800 in 
fines and costs. Applicant currently consumes alcohol once or twice a month.4 
 
 In about 2006, Applicant was diagnosed with seizures. With her parent’s 
knowledge, she illegally used marijuana daily until about 2008 to prevent seizures. During 
this period, Applicant purchased marijuana every two days. Applicant’s seizures ceased 
by late 2007, and she stopped using marijuana by early- to mid-2008.5 
 
 In October 2016, Applicant illegally purchased marijuana, drove home, and then 
twice illegally used marijuana. At the time of Applicant’s October 2016 DUI arrest, she 
had been returning from purchasing marijuana, with the intent to use marijuana again, 
when she was in a car accident. Applicant remains friends with an active marijuana user 
– who is legally prescribed marijuana – with whom she had used marijuana as a teenager. 
Applicant attributed her 2016 marijuana use to her emotional distress following her 
father’s death. Applicant has not attended any grief, drug, or mental-health counseling 
since her October 2016 arrest. Applicant had two negative drug tests in November 2016 
and May 2017.6 
                                                          
2 GE 1-2. 
 
3 GE 3; Tr. 42. 
 
4 GE 3; Tr. 43. 
 
5 GE 3; Tr. 27-29, 46-48. 
 
6 GE 3; Tr. 30-41, 59. 
3 
 
 On her September 2015 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant listed no 
illegal drug use within the previous seven years. On her December 2016 SCA, Applicant 
listed that she used marijuana on two occasions while possessing a security clearance in 
October 2016. Applicant testified that her marijuana use began in 2006 and ceased prior 
to attending college in August 2008. She explained that she did not disclose any illegal 
drug use on her September 2015 SCA because she had not used any illegal drugs in the 
previous seven years. I found Applicant’s testimony and explanation to be credible.7 
 
 Applicant’s work performance, work ethic, and character are highly regarded by 
her current supervisor. Her supervisor’s letter of support references poor “life decisions” 
but does not indicate that she is fully aware of Applicant’s illegal drug use history.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
                                                          
 
7 GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 28-31. 
 
8 AE A. 
4 
 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
 Applicant frequently purchased and used marijuana from 2006 until 2008. In 
October 2016, while possessing a security clearance, Applicant twice illegally purchased 
and twice used marijuana. Following her October 2016 arrest for DUI and possession of 
marijuana, she tested positive for marijuana. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (b), (c) and (f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the drug involvement security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
5 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and  
 
(3) provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
  Applicant abstained from marijuana use for over eight years; however, when faced 
with the emotional distress of her father’s death, she deliberately sought out marijuana to 
purchase and use. Had she not been arrested, Applicant would have used marijuana 
again. About 20 months passed between Applicant’s 2016 arrest and her security 
clearance hearing. Applicant has not sought any other assistance in dealing with her 
emotional distress or developing support structures to reduce the likelihood that future 
drug use will recur. Applicant’s deliberate conduct, in knowing violation of DOD policies, 
casts doubt on her current reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
  Applicant maintains contact with a childhood friend who has a prescription for 
medical marijuana; however, the individual does not use marijuana in Applicant’s 
presence. There is no evidence that Applicant has changed or avoided the 
environment(s) where she previously used marijuana, and she has not provided a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement. Applicant has acknowledged her 
drug involvement and her violation of DOD policies, but there is no evidence of any 
actions she has taken to reduce the likelihood of her using marijuana in the future. AG ¶ 
26(b) does not apply. There is no record evidence to support the application of AG ¶¶ 
26(c) or 26(d). 
 
  Notwithstanding Applicant’s emotional distress at the loss of her father, she took 
several deliberate actions to purchase and use marijuana, while possessing a DOD 
security clearance and aware of DOD policies prohibiting such drug use. While Applicant 
has acknowledged her poor judgment, there is no evidence that she has taken actions to 
avoid future lapses or to address her underlying emotional distress. Therefore, she has 
not mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse concerns. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol consumption resulted in her 2012 DUI conviction. Although 
Applicant was arrested for DUI in October 2016, there is no record evidence that she was 
impaired by alcohol at the time of her arrest. There is no record evidence that Applicant 
failed any field sobriety tests, that her blood alcohol level exceeded the legal limit, or that 
she was in fact impaired at the time of her arrest. The Government did not provide 
substantial evidence that Applicant was impaired by alcohol at the time of her October 
2016 arrest. AG ¶ 22(a) applies as to the 2012 DUI.  
 
 The burden thereby shifts to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) 
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence with treatment recommendations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 23(a), the first prong of this mitigating condition (“so much time has 
passed”) focuses on the recency of the conduct. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the evidence. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” 
 
  Applicant’s 2012 DUI is the only alcohol-related incident or misconduct in the 
record evidence. Although Applicant continues to consume alcohol, there is no evidence 
of binge consumption or other alcohol-related security concerns. Since her 2012 DUI, 
Applicant has earned her bachelor’s degree and begun employment at a DOD contractor. 
7 
 
Notwithstanding her poor judgment associated with her marijuana use, there is no 
evidence of security significant conduct associated with Applicant’s alcohol consumption 
since her 2012 DUI. AG ¶ 23(a) applies. Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status,  determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she did not use any illegal drugs between summer 
2008 and October 2016. Therefore, her negative responses on her September 2015 SCA 
were accurate and no omissions occurred. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 31. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any of which on their own would be unlikely 
to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast 
doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
  In 2012, Applicant was convicted of DUI. In 2016, she was convicted of reckless 
driving and was found to have illegally possessed marijuana. She admitted that she twice 
8 
 
illegally purchased and twice illegally used marijuana in October 2016. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
(b) apply. 
 
Criminal conduct security concerns may be mitigated under AG ¶ 32. The following 
are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and   
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Approximately 20 months elapsed between Applicant’s most recent criminal 
behavior and the close of the evidentiary record. As discussed above, Applicant 
knowingly and deliberately violated criminal laws and DOD policies when she repeatedly 
purchased, transported, and used marijuana in October 2016. While she was 
experiencing significant emotional distress at the time, there is no evidence that her 
conduct may have ceased but for her arrest. In fact, she had just purchased more 
marijuana to use. Notwithstanding the passage of time and Applicant’s continued 
favorable work performance, there is no evidence that she has taken steps to reduce the 
likelihood of future drug use or criminal behavior. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, G, J, and 
E and the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
9 
 
Applicant repeatedly purchased, transported, and used marijuana while 
possessing a security clearance, at a time when she was distressed at the loss of her 
father. There is no evidence that she has taken steps to reduce the likelihood of future 
drug use or to address the issues that led her to use of illegal drugs in October 2016. 
Notwithstanding her well-regarded work performance and character, I cannot conclude 
that she has mitigated the drug involvement and criminal conduct security concerns 
based on the evidentiary record at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a.-3.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 4, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.9 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
