 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02376 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented on June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On November 30, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
On March 5, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for March 22, 2018. A subsequent amended 
notice was issued on March 14, 2018, moving the hearing date to March 21, 2018. I 
convened the hearing on March 21, 2018. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list and request for 
administrative notice were marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant testified, 
but did not submit any exhibits at the hearing. After leaving the record open for 
additional evidence submissions, Applicant submitted exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 28, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.1 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S. Government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations. Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He was born in Iraq in 1984. He lived there until he 
immigrated to the United States in 2012. He became a U.S. citizen in 2013, while he 
was attending Army basic training. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is employed by a 
private security contractor. He is seeking a clearance to fill a linguist position with a 
federal contractor. He is currently a specialist (E-4) in his state’s Army National Guard. 
He is married with no children. His wife is an Iraqi citizen who is a resident alien in the 
United States.4 
 
                                                          
1 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) III. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Tr. at 6, 17-18, 21-22, 26; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s father (an engineer in the Ministry of 
Transportation), mother, four siblings, father-in-law (who is serving prison time for 
fraud), mother-in-law, two aunts (one of whom is a former member of Iraq’s Parliament), 
and a cousin (who works for an Iraqi intelligence agency) are all residents and citizens 
of Afghanistan.  
 
 Applicant was hired locally as a linguist from 2008 to 2011 for U.S. forces in Iraq. 
He provided linguist services for four different Army divisions during that time. He 
translated sensitive written and oral documents for U.S. forces, coordinated and 
supervised non-U.S. forces during joint combat patrols, and provided cultural advice to 
senior U.S. commanders and noncommissioned officers. Applicant is attempting to 
transfer from the National Guard to the active duty Army. His wife is a full-time student. 
Neither intend to return to Iraq to live. His last visit to Iraq was as a contractor in 2016. 
He did not contact any family members when he was there. His wife has not returned to 
Iraq since she immigrated to this country.5 
 
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and citizens of Iraq: 
 
 1. Applicant’s father (F) and mother (M). M has never worked outside the home. 
F is a mechanic for the Ministry of Transportation. Applicant has quarterly contact with 
both M and F. He and his wife provide no financial support to M or F. He last saw his 
parents in 2012, before he immigrated to the United States.6  
 
 2. Applicant’s four siblings (B1, B2, S1, and S2). B1 works as a mechanic and is 
self-employed. He was in the post-Saddam Hussein Iraqi army for seven years, but he 
was then discharged. B1 has applied for refugee status to immigrate to the United 
States. Applicant has monthly contact with B1. B2 attends middle school and lives with 
his parents. Applicant has monthly contact with him. S1 is a post-graduate student. She 
is married (but seeking a divorce) with two children. Applicant communicates with S2 
less than monthly. S2 is also a student living with her parents. Applicant has quarterly 
contact with her. He last saw his siblings in 2012, before he immigrated to the United 
States. Applicant provides no financial support to any of his siblings. They have all 
expressed a desire to immigrate to the United States.7 
 
 3. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law. His father-in-law is unemployed. 
He is in prison because of a fraudulent private business arrangement. His mother-in-law 
does not work outside the home. Applicant believes his father-in-law receives some sort 
of Iraqi government pension. He has yearly contact with his in-laws.8 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 18-20, 24, 26-27, 45; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-31, 45; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-35, 45; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 38-39; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 4. Applicant’s two aunts (A1 and A2). A1 is a former member of the Iraqi 
Parliament. She served in Parliament from 2006 to 2009. She is an attorney. She is a 
U.S. permanent resident alien. When she is in the United States, she resides with 
Applicant. She typically stays a month at a time. Over the last three years, she resided 
with Applicant approximately three months. The last time she resided with him was in 
December 2017. When A1 is not living with Applicant, he has monthly contact with her. 
A2 is a teacher. Applicant has yearly contact with her. He does not provide A2 with any 
financial support.9 
 
 5. Applicant’s cousin (his mother’s cousin). He works for an Iraqi intelligence 
agency. He was hired in either 2010 or 2011. Applicant has had no contact with him 
since leaving Iraq in 2012.10 
 
Character Evidence. 
 
 Applicant supplied character references from both his current National Guard 
supervisors and his chain of command associated with his translator duties from 2008 
to 2011. His Guard supervisors describe him as an outstanding asset whom they trust. 
They recommend granting his clearance. His chain of command from 2008 to 2011 
described Applicant as having “an outstanding work ethic” and “exceptionally 
trustworthy.” He was also described as, “a brave patriot and selfless defender of 
freedom.” A U.S. Army major stated, “I offer my unqualified endorsement of his 
faithfulness, trustworthiness, and loyalty.” He also received certificates of appreciation 
from the Army units he worked with as a translator.11 
 
Administrative Notice. 
 
 The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq as travel 
within the country remains dangerous. The U.S. Embassy warns that U.S. citizens are at 
high risk for kidnapping and violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The 
U.S. government considers the potential threat to U.S. government personnel in Iraq to 
be serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines. The 
Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, 
maintaining a formidable force in Iraq and Syria.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 39-41, 43-44; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 43-44; GE 2. 
 
11 AE B-C. 
 
12 HE II. 
 
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows:  
 
6 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence entity 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship between Iraq and the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Iraq does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Iraq who might be coerced by 
governmental entities, or pressured to assist Iraq.  
 
7 
 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”13 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Iraq seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his relatives 
living in Iraq, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), and 7(e) apply based upon Applicant’s family members who are residents and 
citizens of Iraq and A1’s occasional living arrangements with him. Applicant denied any 
contact with his cousin since moving to the United States in 2012, and there is no 
evidence of such contact. AG ¶ 7 (g) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that he has limited contact with his relatives in Iraq. He 
presented sufficient evidence to establish that it is unlikely that he would be placed in a 
position to choose between the interest of his relatives living in Iraq and those of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies and AG 8(c) partially applies. 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He worked as a translator from 2008 to 2011 for 
four different U.S. Army Divisions where he earned praise for his loyalty, bravery, and 
trustworthiness while serving in harm’s way. He became a U.S. citizen by enlisting and 
serving in the U.S. armed forces where he currently serves. His National Guard and 
Army supervisors and coworkers attest to his loyalty, dedication, and overall 
trustworthiness. The evidence supports that Applicant has longstanding ties to the 
United States and would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG 
¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered the recommendations of his coworkers and 
supervisors, who resoundingly recommend that Applicant be granted his security 
clearance. I also considered his strong ties to this country, first as a translator serving in 
harm’s way while assisting U.S forces, and second, while serving his country and state 
in the National Guard. He has demonstrated his longstanding loyalty to the United 
States. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence 
concerns were mitigated. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
