 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          )  ISCR Case No. 17-02022 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant settled and paid all of the delinquent debts listed on her statement of 
reasons (SOR). Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 1, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On July 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A 
the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 
2017. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
On August 29, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and she requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On September 26, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
February 16, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On February 28, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
                                         
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for March 23, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
one exhibit; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 17-19; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A). On April 4, 2018, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript. One exhibit was provided after the hearing, and it was admitted 
without objection. (AE B) The record closed on April 23, 2018. (Tr. 58, 61) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.    
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old substitute teacher who is seeking a security clearance 
to enable her to be employed in an information-technology specialty. (Tr. 4, 7) She has 
an employment offer contingent on her obtaining a security clearance. (Tr. 13, 42) In 
1999, she graduated from high school, and in 2004, she graduated from college with a 
bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering. (Tr. 5) She is currently in a dual 
master’s degree program relating to information technology. (Tr. 5, 54) She has not 
served in the military. (Tr. 6) 
 
In 2004, she married, and in 2015, she divorced. (Tr. 6) She has two children from 
her first marriage who are ages 8 and 12. (Tr. 6-7) She receives $800 monthly for child 
support from her former husband. (Tr. 34) In 2017, she married, and she has three step 
children from her current marriage who are ages 12, 21, and 23. (Tr. 6-7)  
 
Applicant’s husband is a program manager with a specialty in information 
technology who is employed by a government contractor. (Tr. 23) He currently holds a 
DOD security clearance. (Tr. 23) His annual salary is about $180,000. (Tr. 24) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant fell behind on her student loans because she was underemployed and 
due to her divorce. (Tr. 30, 32) For several years, her annual income was about $10,000. 
(Tr. 39) She was unemployed for nine months in 2014. (Tr. 40)  
 
The SOR alleges five charged-off delinquent student-loan debts totaling $89,330 
owed to the same creditor in the following amounts: $27,148; $17,148; $16,993; $16,517; 
and $11,524. She maintained contact with the student-loan creditors and made payments 
when she was able to do so. (Tr. 30-33) She did not seek an additional deferment in her 
student loans due to her attendance in a master’s degree program. (Tr. 54) On March 22, 
2018, the creditor for the five student loans offered to settle the $93,086 debt for $26,000 
if paid by April 25, 2018. (AE A) On April 5, 2018, the creditor wrote that the original 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
balance due for the five debts is $93,086; the debt was settled for less than the full 
amount; and the balance owed is zero. (AE B) The creditor’s correspondence noted the 
substantial savings may be reported to the Internal Revenue Service as income. (AE B)  
 
Applicant does not use credit cards, and she is paying her other debts through a 
consolidation loan. (Tr. 35) Her monthly payment on her consolidation loan is $449. (Tr. 
36) Her tax returns are filed. (Tr. 54) Applicant’s May 10, 2017 credit report’s only 
delinquent accounts are the five delinquent student-loan accounts listed in the SOR. (GE 
2) Most of her accounts in her credit report indicate paid, transferred, or paid as agreed. 
(GE 2) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
4 
                                         
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
 
5 
                                         
 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,2 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  
                                            
2 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
The SOR alleges five charged-off delinquent student-loan debts totaling $89,330 
owed to the same creditor. Applicant’s financial problems were caused by 
underemployment, unemployment, and divorce. These are circumstances beyond her 
control.  
 
Applicant stayed in contact with the creditor, and she made some payments. She 
showed due diligence and good faith after her hearing by contacting the creditor and 
settling her five delinquent student-loan debts. All of Applicant’s other accounts are 
current or paid. There are clear indications that her financial problem is resolved, and her 
finances are under control. Future financial problems are unlikely to occur. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), and 20(d) are established, and financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
 
7 
                                         
 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old substitute teacher who is seeking a security clearance 
to enable her to be employed in an information-technology specialty. In 2004, she 
graduated from college with a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering. She 
is currently in a dual master’s degree program relating to information technology.  
 
The SOR alleges five charged-off delinquent student-loan debts totaling about 
$89,330 owed to the same creditor. Applicant’s financial problems were caused by 
circumstances beyond her control. She settled and paid all of her delinquent debts. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has . . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his [or her] outstanding indebtedness is 
credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.) There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that 
the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the 
ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a track record of paying her debts. 
 
Applicant no longer has any delinquent debts. Her actions show financial 
responsibility and judgment and favorably resolve questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Future financial 
problems are unlikely to occur.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are mitigated.  
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
    Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
