 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00285 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 16, 2016. 
(Item 1.) On February 6, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 26, 2018. (Answer), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on March 29, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 
6. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
 
2 
 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on April 5, 2018, and 
responded. The case was assigned to me on June 21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 50, is twice divorced and has three adult children. Applicant 
honorably served 24 years as an enlisted airman on active duty in the U.S. Air Force. She 
retired from the U.S. Air Force in May 2011, achieving the rank of Master Sergeant, E-7. 
She has been employed with her current employer since May 2016. She works full time 
as a business analyst for a federal contractor. She has held a security clearance since 
February 5, 2007. 
 
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) sets forth security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E. Guideline F (Financial Considerations) lists 13 financial allegations, SOR 1.a 
through SOR 1.l and SOR 1.n, totaling about $19,000. SOR 1.m, the 14th financial 
concern, alleges Applicant failed to file her 2016 Federal and State income tax returns. 
(Item 4) In her Answer, Applicant admits to all allegations, with the exception of SOR 1.m. 
She stated that she filed her 2016 Federal tax return, but did not file her state tax return.  
(Item 2) 
 
Applicant accepts responsibility for the debts and the fact that they have gone 
unpaid or closed. During the time the accounts became delinquent, she and her husband 
were going through a separation in March 2015. Applicant explained that he was 
physically and verbally abusive. When she finally asked him to leave, she was left with all 
the household bills and the credit card accounts. They attempted reconciliation, and 
Applicant’s husband agreed to help with the financial issues. They were not living 
together, but he agreed to pay the credit card bills. She was unaware of the fact that many 
of them went to collection. She stated that she has made arrangement to take funds from 
her savings plan to pay unpaid balances within four months. (Answer) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided documentation that in April 2018, 
she resolved the following debts in full: SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. As to the debts in SOR 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, Applicant stated that she has made payments or resolved the debts, but 
did not provide any evidence. She also noted that several debts appear to be duplicates, 
and while that may be true, she did not note the accounts.  
 
As to SOR 1.m and 1.n concerning the filing and payment of Federal and State 
taxes for 2016, Applicant stated that the Federal tax return was filed timely and that she 
has a formal payment arrangement with the IRS and provided a case number. She noted 
that she has made a payment of $400 and an additional payment of $300. However, she 
did not provide any documentation to substantiate the claim. 
 
Applicant noted that she has submitted her 2017 Federal and State tax returns and 
is seeking a tax counselor to resolve the unfiled 2016 State tax returns. She believes all 
delinquent accounts will be satisfied by June 30, 2018. (Response to Form) 
 
 
3 
 
As to the Personal Conduct allegation, under Guideline E, that she falsified her 
SCA, Applicant answered “No” to all questions in Section 26: Financial Records. She 
stated during her OPM interview that she believed her husband was making payments 
on the credit cards. She stated during that interview that she had no knowledge of those 
accounts. She thought that they could have been cards that she co-signed with her 
husband. She did not list the tax information because it occurred after completion of the 
SCA. (Item 6) She stated that she was not trying to mislead the Government. Her earlier 
credit report shows many accounts as “pays as agreed.” 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
 
4 
 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”),  AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) and AG (19 (f) (“failure to file  or 
fraudulently file filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual Federal , state or local income tax as required. 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s divorce was a condition beyond 
her control, she has not acted responsibly to address the resulting debts and tax issues.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided documentation of recent payment of four accounts. She stated that she has 
begun to pay others, but did not provide any evidence. She also did not provide any 
documentation with regard to the tax situation. She plans to pay all the accounts, but a 
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient mitigation. The record is silent as to her current 
ability to repay her delinquent debts, the reasons that they have persisted, or her plan to 
resolve them other than her stated intent to take money from a savings plan. Her financial 
problems are not under control.  
 
Applicant failed to meet her burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.n. against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
6 
 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of her SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted intentionally falsifying her SCA. .An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the 
time of the omission.1 An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on an SCA was 
deliberate.2  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that she was aware of some 
of her delinquent debts, because she stated that her husband left her with all the bills 
after attempting reconciliation. She stated during her interview that she had no knowledge 
of any of the delinquent accounts and that she misunderstood the question. Her claims 
of innocent mistake are not credible in light of the facts. She should have disclosed the 
delinquent debts she had knowledge of on her SCA. Given these facts, I find substantial 
evidence of an intent by Applicant to omit, conceal, or falsify facts on her SCA. Therefore, 
AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them apply. 
Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct her falsification or 
concealment. She provided no information that indicates she was ill-advised in completing 
her SCA. Falsifying information is a serious offense and Applicant has not shown that 
similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, she failed to take responsibility 
for her actions. She has not provided sufficient information in this record to demonstrate 
that she has met his burden of proof for her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, including her honorable military service, I conclude that 
Applicant deliberately falsified her SCA, and she has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried her burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-c: : AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.d-e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i-j:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-n:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
