
2 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 14, 2018. On May 
24, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
the hearing was scheduled for June 12, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1-3 were admitted without objection. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified but submitted no documents.  
Findings of Fact1 
Applicant is 57 years old. He graduated from high school in 1979. Applicant has 
been employed as a missile technician and security specialist for federal contractors 
since he retired from the Navy in 2010. He served honorably from 1990 to 2010 as a 
submariner, attaining the rank of petty officer, first class (E-6). Applicant’s first marriage 
was from 1981–1983; second marriage was from 1988 to 1996; third was from 1999 to 
2000; and his present marriage commenced in 2011, and it is strained. (Tr. 22) 
Applicant testified that although he continues to live under the same roof with his wife, 
the relationship is over. (Tr. 47) It is an economic relationship since she needs his 
health insurance coverage. Applicant reports one daughter, age 34.  
In § 26 of his March 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he owed a delinquent 
debt on a mortgage of approximately $240,000, to a bank creditor. Applicant testified 
that he purchased a house in state A in 2011, obtaining a mortgage to do so. In 2014, 
he had to move across country for his job in another state. However, his wife refused to 
sign-off on the sale of their home in state A. (Tr. 19) Applicant deliberately allowed the 
house to go to foreclosure sale because he was angry at his estranged wife and wanted 
to punish her, by making sure that if he had nothing, she would also have nothing. (Tr. 
46-47) The house sold for $280,000 and they owed $214,000 on the mortgage at the 
time of sale. (Tr. 15)  
Applicant testified that he exercised poor judgment in placing his faith in un-
named subject matter experts, who supposedly advised him that the $66,000 remainder 
from the sale, would be used to pay all of the debts listed in the SOR. (Tr. 12-14)  He 
claims that he left instructions, along with account numbers, and addresses of creditors, 
for the mortgage bank to apply the remainder to satisfy these debts. He offered no 
explanation why the proceeds of the house sale would be used to pay unrelated 
consumer debts from 2013-2014. Applicant conceded that he had no documents or 
substantiation showing that he left such instructions. (Tr. 25) Since only $9,000 to 
$10,000 was deposited into his bank account, after he moved across the country, 
Applicant assumed that the majority of the remainder went to pay off these debts. He 
produced no truth-in-lending or closing documents. (Tr. 17) 
In his March 2018 Answer, Applicant claims that he has been contacting the 
listed creditors to make payment arrangements “in 12 months or sooner.” (Tr. 26, 
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 27, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
3 
 
 
Answer) Applicant testified that he has made progress and paid off some of the 
delinquent debts, and he agreed there should be an electronic or paper trail to 
substantiate this fact. (Tr. 29) I left the record open until June 26, 2018, for Applicant to 
provide proof of payments. Applicant submitted documents post-hearing including: E-
mails, a screenshot of a bank account, and a letter showing that the creditor at SOR ¶ 
1.b was paid $10,594, representing payment in full, on May 2, 2018 (AE A); a June 19, 
2018 e-mail indicating that the creditors at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f would not provide 
requested documentation concerning his delinquent accounts (AE B); and several 
pages from an Equifax credit report and bank statement showing that the debt at SOR ¶ 
1.f was paid in the amount of $3,152 in October 2016 (AE C). All were admitted without 
objection.  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling over $25,000. Five are charged-
off debts, and one placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant produced post-hearing 
documents to show that the largest delinquency (SOR ¶1.b), a credit-card debt owed to 
a federal credit union, has been paid in full in the amount of $10,595 as of May 2, 2018. 
(AE A) Applicant has also paid off the delinquency (SOR ¶ 1.c), another credit-card debt 
opened in late 2011, with a balance of $4,207. (GE 3, Tr. 30)  He paid it in full on May 7, 
2018. (AE A) Applicant also paid off the debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) charged off in June 2014, in 
the amount of $3,152, paid in October 2016. (AE C) He provided evidence that the $342 
debt owed to a telecommunications provider was paid on May 23, 2018 (AE A).  The 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f, have been paid. Applicant 
has reached out to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he has established a payment plan to 
make payments online. (AE B)  
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his job. Applicant’s earns $65,000 per 
year in salary plus $800 a month from his navy pension, and $1,700 from his VA 
disability. (Tr. 44) He has $17,000 to $18,000 in his 401k retirement plan, and his wife 
recently got a job working for low wages at a restaurant. (Tr. 45) Applicant, has taken 
financial counseling on base, through the Family Assistance Program. (Tr. 46-47) He 
blames his wife for his financial predicament since she was unemployed for a long time 
and refused to cooperate in the sale of their home in state A. (Tr. 46)  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
 
4 
 
 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
potentially apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
   
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and testimony. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2 
Applicant has not met that burden. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant had to move across the country to follow his job in 2014, and this 
caused him to have to sell his house in state A. His chronically unemployed wife was 
estranged and refused to cooperate in the sale. Thus, he followed very poor advice and 
let the house go to a foreclosure sale. To some extent, these conditions were beyond 
his control. He testified credibly that he only recently became aware that the SOR debts 
were not resolved with the proceeds from the sale of the home. He has produced 
relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances, albeit only recently.  
 
 Applicant has combined annual earnings of almost $100,000. I trust that he will 
be able to continue with payments in accordance with his payment plan entered with the 
creditor in SOR ¶1.a. He produced documents substantiating that the other five 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR, have now been paid in full. He had financial 
counseling. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his 
financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He admits to making some foolish 
judgment errors in trying to punish his wife, but he has moved past this. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant served on active duty for 20 
 
7 
 
 
years without security issues. Most importantly, Applicant has now addressed the 
specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to resolve them. He has 
met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:               For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
