 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00108 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 18, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 20, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2018.  DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on April 17, 2018, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on May 9, 2018. The Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant 
offered eighteen exhibits at the hearing, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through R, 
which were admitted without objection.  Applicant called two witnesses and testified on 
 
2 
 
her own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on May 21, 2018, to 
allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  
Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on May 17, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old.  She is divorced, and has one son.  She has a high 
school diploma and some college.  She holds the positon of Administrative Assistant for 
a defense contractor.  She seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with her 
employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to seventeen separate creditors 
totaling approximately $23,000, consisting of consumer and medical debt and an 
outstanding tax lien in the amount of $1,451.  In her Answer, Applicant admits each of 
the allegations.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated February 17, 2016; November 24, 
2017; and March 27, 2018, reflect that these debts were at one time owing.  
(Government Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.)  Applicant has been working for her current employer 
since January 2016.   
 
 While working for her prior employer, another defense contractor, Applicant held 
a security clearance, both secret and SCI, from 1980 through 2011.  She was then laid 
off, and in 2012, she turned 55 years old, and took an early retirement.  During that 
twenty year period, she had no security violations or warnings.  
 
 Applicant has suffered from a chronic illness since the age of 17, which has 
affected her ability to work from time to time during flare-ups.  Specifically, Applicant has 
had Crohn’s disease since the age of 17.  Instead of filing for disability, over the course 
of her life, she has chosen to work as much as possible.  In 2012, she was laid off from 
her previous job, unrelated to her disease, and Applicant began to have financial 
problems.  She received a severage package of $8,000, which she used to pay bills and 
help her son go to college.  In 2013, Applicant moved out of state and temporarily lived 
with her ex-husband.  At this point, Applicant was living on her retirement check of 
$2,000 monthly. While still unemployed and not receiving unemployment benefits, her 
COBRA medical insurance ran out, and she was faced with back surgery to have a cyst 
removed, which caused additional medical costs and other unexpected bills.  (Tr. p. 65.)  
Applicant was also paying $1,000 monthly for her son’s college tuition.  Applicant then 
moved to another state to help take care of her mother.   
 
 
3 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant relocated back to her home state.  Applicant’s illness is 
now in remission, and she has been working for her current employer since January 
2016.  She does not anticipate any time away from work due to medical issues.   
 
 Applicant became delinquently indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR as a 
result of her illness.  In January 2018, after receiving the SOR, Applicant hired a debt 
resolution company to assist her in resolving her delinquent debts above $500.  Since 
then she has been receiving debt counseling, and debt consolidation to resolve her 
debts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Since March 2018, Applicant has been making regular 
monthly payments of $354 for debt resolution services.  The debt company is currently 
working to resolved the debts listed in 1.a. 1.b., and 1.n., of the SOR.  Their policy does 
not allow Applicant to include any debts under $500.  (Tr. p. 92.)  In regard to the debts 
that are less than $500, Applicant has set up payment plans with each of the creditors 
that she is following.     
 
1.a. A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the amount of about 
$12,365.  This was Applicant’s car loan.  She needed $3,000 in repairs and could not 
afford to make the car payment and repairs.  Applicant defaulted on the loan and the car 
was repossessed.  This creditor is being paid through the debt resolution program.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
1.b.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the amount of 
about $3,724.  Applicant co-signed for an apartment for her god son and he did not pay 
the rent.  This creditor is being paid through the debt resolution program.  (Applicant’s 
Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)     
 
1.c.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the amount of 
about $833.  This was dental work for Applicant’s son.  She plans to set up a payment 
plan of $20 monthly to begin in June 2018.  (Tr. p. 93.) 
 
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the amount of 
about $442.  Applicant settled the debt for $176.63, and it has been paid in full.  (Tr. p. 
94.)  
 
1.e.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the amount of about $346.  
Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly that she is following 
until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
amount of about $330.  Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly 
that she is following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
1.g.  A delinquent medical debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
amount of about $88.  Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly 
that she is following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A).   
 
 
4 
 
1.h.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the amount of about 
$471.  Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly that she is 
following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)   
 
1.i    A delinquent debt was placed for collection in the amount of about $171. 
Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $28.52 monthly that she is following 
until it is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
 
1.j.  A delinquent medical debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
amount of about $534.  Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $25 monthly 
that she is following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)   
 
1.k.  A delinquent medical debt owed to a creditor in the amount of about $26.  
Applicant made a payment of $38 that resolved the debt in full.  (Tr. p. 82, and 
Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
1.l.  A delinquent debt was placed for collection the amount of about $464.  Applicant 
settled the debt for $227.37 and her payment agreement with the creditor is $38.51 
monthly that she is following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A.)   
 
1.m.  A delinquent debt was placed for collection the amount of about $199.  Applicant’s 
payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly that she is following until the debt is 
paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
1.n A delinquent debt was placed for collection in the amount of about $2,522.  This 
debt is included in the debt resolution program, and will be paid off in full by November 
29, 2021.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)   
 
1.o.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the amount of about $453.  
Applicant’s payment agreement with the creditor is $20 monthly that she is following 
until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
1.p.  A delinquent debt was placed for collection in the amount of about $266.  Applicant 
settled the account for $159.37, and her payment agreement with the creditor is $54.13 
monthly that she is following until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E, and Tr. 
p. 83.) 
 
1.q.  A delinquent state tax lien entered against the Applicant in May 2016 in the amount 
of about $1,451, increased to $1,684.  In December 2017, Applicant set up a payment 
plan with the creditor and is paying $53.17 monthly until the debt is resolved.  (Tr. p. 68, 
Applicant’s Exhibit A and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
 Two witnesses, including her son and a past coworker, testified on Applicant’s 
behalf.  They both confirm her hardworking, responsible, and trustworthy nature, as well 
as her strong dedication to her family and her job.  (Tr. pp. 30-41.)  
 
 
5 
 
 Letters of recommendation from professional colleagues, coworkers, and friends  
of the Applicant that attest to her hardworking nature, high degree of integrity, good 
judgment and reliability.  Applicant is highly recommended for a security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit F.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluation for 2017 is satisfactory.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
G.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s chronic illness has caused her to miss work and she has 
incurred delinquent debts that she has been unable to pay.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Since getting back to work in 2016, Applicant has obtained financial counseling 
and has hired a debt resolution company to assist her in resolving her larger debts.  In 
regard to her smaller debts, she has contacted each of her creditors and set up 
payment plans that she is following.  Her illness is in remission, and she is doing her 
best to be a reliable employee.  She is commended for her hardworking nature and 
continued desire, to be a part of the workforce and take care of herself and her family, 
even when facing a chronic illness.  Her finances are now stable and she is able to pay 
her debts.  She has demonstrated that she is financially responsible.  She has acted 
reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances. She has demonstrated good 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  The Financial Considerations concern has 
been mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
