 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00486 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2016, Applicant completed an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). On March 5, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 14, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on April 12, 
2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He provided a timely response and 
submitted a document marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There were no objections to 
any documents and they are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
June 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has never married and 
has no children. From January 2006 to April 2016, he was in business with a partner. He 
left the business and has been employed with his current employer since April 2016.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2009 through 2015 (¶ 1.a) and his state income tax returns for the same tax 
years (¶ 1.b). Applicant admitted these allegations.2  
 
Applicant disclosed in his August 2016 e-QIP that he failed to file 2009 through 
2015 federal and state income tax returns. He stated: “Didn’t make more than $10,000 
and didn’t file.”3 In reply to the query what action he has taken, he stated: “None yet. Now 
that I’m not self-employed and make money, I’m going to get in touch with the State of 
[X] [a]nd the IRS and see what I need to do.”4  
 
During Applicant’s October 2017 interview with a government investigator, he 
stated that from January 2006 to April 2016 he was a partner and owner of a business. 
He had a disagreement with his business partner so he chose to leave the business. His 
former business partner passed away in October 2017. He further stated that the reason 
he failed to file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2016 was 
because his business partner stated he did not earn enough money during those tax 
years. Applicant told the investigator that he earned approximately $10,000 each of the 
tax years alleged. He believed he would have likely receive a refund for all of the tax 
years. He planned to call his state tax commission and the IRS by April 2018 to see what 
steps he needed to take regarding the tax years alleged. He did not have access to any 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
of his former business’s records because his partner was deceased. He was able to live 
off of his earning because he was frugal and his parents provided him a residence.5 
 
 Government interrogatories were sent to Applicant requesting he provide state tax 
transcripts for the tax years 2009 through 2015. It also requested IRS tax transcripts for 
the same tax years. In Applicant’s January 2018 response to the interrogatories, he 
stated: “I did not file taxes from 2009 -2015.”6 No other information was provided.  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated:  
 
My business partner was a good friend and mentor to me, I had known him 
since 1990 or 1991. The first year of the partnership, we each made around 
$10,000 from the company. He told me that since we made below a certain 
amount of money, we didn’t need to file taxes. The company continued that 
way until I left in 2016. He passed away later that year. After I got out I 
realized that he had been lying to me for years. I’m currently in the process 
of filing back taxes and getting current. I in no way tried to escape my civic 
duty by not filing my taxes. If I had filed, it appears, I would have received 
refunds. I put my trust into someone that I had looked up to most of life. I 
have learned from this and will get through it. I am not an untrustworthy 
person, but I made a bad choice in taking him at his word.7 
 
Applicant did not provide any additional information about what specific actions he 
has taken to file his delinquent federal and state income tax returns. He did not provide 
information about how he determined his annual income and whether he had other 
sources of income during these years. He did not provide other information addressing 
what inquiries he made regarding his tax filing responsibilities, and whether he filed tax 
returns before 2009 and after 2015.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
5 Item 5.  
 
6 Item 6. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 For tax year 2009, the minimum income required to file federal tax returns for a single person was $9,350; 
2010-$9,350; 2011-$9,500; 2012-$9,750; 2013-$9,750; 2014-$10,000; and 2015-$10,150. www.IRS.gov.  
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
  
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2009 through 2015 federal and state income tax 
returns. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant admitted he failed to timely file federal and state tax returns for tax years 
2009 through 2015. He attributed his failure to relying on advice from his business partner 
who told him if he earned less than $10,000, he did not have to file. Applicant did not 
 
6 
 
 
provide evidence that his earnings were less than the minimum threshold for filing each 
tax year. Applicant disclosed his failure to file those tax returns on his August 2016 e-QIP. 
The Government subsequently requested that he provide IRS and state tax transcripts, 
which he did not do. In his May 2018 Form response, he indicated he was in the process 
of filing his delinquent tax returns, but did not provide documentary evidence to 
corroborate any actions he has taken to date. His tax issues are not resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant may have naively relied on his business partner’s advice, which was 
somewhat beyond his control. However, at some point during those seven years he had 
a duty to make an independent inquiry as to his legal obligations for filing tax returns and 
current threshold requirements. Without additional information, such as Applicant’s 
income for each year, other income sources, and specifically the steps he may have taken 
to contact the IRS and his state tax authority to resolve the delinquencies, the evidence 
is insufficient to establish mitigation under this mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
It is unknown if Applicant sought financial counseling, and there are not clear 
indications at this time to conclude the problem is being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. There is no evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He failed to file his 2009 through 2015 federal and state 
income tax returns. He believed at the time he did not have to file them because he did 
not meet the minimum income threshold. Insufficient evidence about his income for those 
years was provided to make that conclusion. In addition, he did not provide documentary 
evidence that he has contacted the IRS and his state tax authority to resolve the issue. 
Although Applicant may not have deliberately intended to skirt his legal obligations, once 
he became aware there was an issue, he failed to provide corroborating evidence to show 
he either was not required to file because he did not meet the minimum threshold or that 
he has subsequently filed for the years he was required.  
 
At this juncture, Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
