 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00118 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 25 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On March 3, 2017, Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Government Exhibit 3.)  On February 2, 2018, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on May 2, 2018, and 
 
2 
 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 13, 2018.  The Government offered 
three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered one exhibit at the hearing, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his 
own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 20, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 59 years old.  He is married a second time, and has three biological 
children and one step-child.  He has a bachelor’s degree.  He is employed by a defense 
contractor as a Principal Investigator.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
Applicant served on active duty in the Air Force from 1981 until 1988 when he 
was honorably discharged.  During his  military career, he was an Air Force Officer and 
Aviator, who flew F-4 Aircraft and was certified under the Personal Reliability Program 
to safeguard, control, operate, and deliver nuclear weapons, if needed during the Cold 
War.  He has been employed in the defense industry for the past thirty years.  He has 
been working for his current employer since 2001.  Over the past thirty-seven years 
Applicant has worked on numerous classified programs and assignments and has 
consistently safeguarded all classified information entrusted to him.   
 
The SOR identified two allegations under this guideline, one concerning 
Applicant’s failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2014, 
2015, and 2016, and the other based upon the fact that his wages were garnished by 
the state in January 2017 for delinquent taxes in the approximate amount of $24,747.  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations.   Applicant’s failure to file 
his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2014, 2015, and 2016 was based 
on bad advice he received from his tax professional.  Applicant was told by his 
accountant that if he was due a refund he may file his income tax returns prior to the 
expiration of the refund claims period without penalty.  He did not understand that by 
doing that, he was not complying with his legal responsibility to file his annual income 
tax returns and negatively impacting his ability to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant 
only understood from his consultant that if he was expecting a refund, according to 
Federal Tax Law, there is no penalty for failing to file his tax return by the deadline even 
if he did not ask for an extension.   
 
Applicant testified that up until 2014, he and his wife have always prepared their 
income taxes themselves, and have always filed on a timely basis.  In 2014, however, 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s wife had become interested in investing in securities and trading, and 
enjoyed it, and is very good at it.  So their tax preparation went instantly from routine to 
quite involved.  They tried to hire the tax preparer to do their taxes, but she was not 
available.  She did however provide tax advice which impacted their decision to delay 
their filing until they could obtain the proper documentation needed.  However, as 
Applicant began to approach the three-year period to claim the tax refund, Applicant 
made an asserted effort to obtain all documentation necessary in filing the income tax 
returns in question.  To get this done he and his wife went through each Ameritrade 
Transaction Notification and other relevant documents in order to properly prepare their 
income tax returns for filing, which was time consuming, burdensome and 
overwhelming.  All Federal and state tax returns in question were filed on February 25, 
2018, resulting in substantial refunds.  (Tr. p. 32.)  Applicant explained that this was an 
isolated incident that will never happen again.  They plan to hire professional tax 
preparers for all income tax filings in the future. 
 
 Applicant also received two income tax refunds for wages that were garnished by 
the state in the amount of $26,827.25; and by the IRS in the amount of $1,478.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit A, and Tr. pp. 23-24.)  
 
 Applicant acknowledges his mistake in not filing his income tax returns in a timely 
fashion and is remorseful.  He has now filed and provided copies of his Federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2014, 2015, and 2016.  He realizes that going 
forward, he must continue to file his income tax returns on time, if he is to continue to be 
security clearance worthy.  Not getting around to filing income tax returns shows poor 
judgment and unreliability and disqualifies one from access to classified information.      
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
4 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  One is applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2014, 2015, and 2016.  He explained that the only reason he did not 
file for these three years was because he was told that if he was expecting a 
refund, he would not be penalized for failing to do so.  However, by relying on 
and following the professional advice of a tax consultant, he got himself into 
trouble.  He did not consider the fact that his actions demonstrate poor judgment 
and unreliability and a failure to fulfill his legal obligation to file his income tax 
returns.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.   
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.  
 
          It is a fact that when Applicant filed the income tax returns in question, he 
received substantial income tax refunds for monies that were garnished as a result of 
his failure to file his income tax returns in a timely fashion.  This situation can be 
characterized as an isolated incident that will never recur.  Applicant now understands 
that he must file the required income tax returns on an annual basis, and he must 
always comply with Federal and state law going forward.  In the event that he fails to 
comply with the law, Applicant’s security clearance will be in immediate jeopardy.  
Without reservation or delay, in order to continue to be eligible for access to classified 
 
6 
 
information, Applicant must demonstrate good judgment and reliability in every area of 
his life, including his financial affairs and the timely filing of his income tax returns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
                                                
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
