 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-09077 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 31, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Drug Involvement or Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2011. Department Counsel 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge in an undated submission. The case 
was assigned to me on March 1, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 15, 
2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 4, 2011. The Government 
 
2 
 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, which were admitted without objection. It also 
introduced three documents for Administrative Notice, marked I through III. The 
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were also admitted without objection, 
and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
April 12, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k. 2.a., 
2.b., 2.c., 2.d., 2.f., 2.h., and 2.i.1 He denies allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.i., 2.e., and 2.g. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for five years. He is divorced and has a 17-year-old daughter. He is taking 
classes toward earning an associate’s degree. He served briefly in the Air Force from 
August 1973 through September 1974, when he was discharged from the Air Force 
because he was experiencing “flashback phenomena during his technical training” due 
to his extensive usage of LSD prior to entering the military, as well as his “multiple prior 
service illegal drug use,” and his “use of illegal drugs” after entering the Air Force. (GE 
2; GE 4 through GE 8; AE C; Tr. 42, 51-52, 57-59, 77-80.) 
  
 Applicant has a long history with illegal substances. He first used illegal drugs in 
high school. His accounts regarding the types of illegal drugs used, duration of use, and   
frequency of drug use change throughout the evidence. However, it is clear that his 
drug history includes use of marijuana, methamphetamines, cocaine, heroin, PCP, 
mushrooms, mescaline, LSD, and hashish. (GE 6; GE 8; GE 9; Tr. 44-51.) 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use began in approximately 1973 and continued until at 
least summer of 2009, with varying frequencies. He began using marijuana in high 
school. His use continued after joining the Air Force in 1973, despite applying for a 
security clearance through the Air Force. He used marijuana periodically until 
approximately 2003, when his use increased to daily. At that time, Applicant was 
prescribed the drug “morphine sulfate” and was unable to sleep. He used marijuana to 
help him sleep. From 2004 to 2006, he was prescribed “lithium sulfate” and again used 
marijuana to help him sleep. Although he testified that his last marijuana use was in 
2004, he later confessed his marijuana use continued through 2006, when he stopped 
taking the lithium sulfate. Upon further examination, he admitted his last use of 
marijuana was “probably last summer,” referring to the summer of 2009. (GE 6; GE 8 
through GE 11; GE 13; Tr. 44-46, 62-63, 97-100.) 
 
 Applicant admitted he used LSD and mescaline approximately six times in 1973 
at parties “to be sociable.” While in the Air Force, Applicant used hashish approximately 
6-to-12 times. (GE 3.) In a February 2008 Affidavit, he also admitted: 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR was incorrectly lettered and alleged this allegation as a second 2.g. Applicant’s answer addresses this 
allegation as 2.i. 
 
3 
 
From the ages of fifteen through thirty, I used various drugs. . . I snorted 
crystal methamphetamine in the form of a powder on a monthly basis, 
which made me feel high for a duration of twelve hours. I snorted cocaine 
in the powder form two to three times a year, which made me feel high for 
a duration of twelve hours. I injected heroin two to three times a year, 
which made me feel high for a duration of four to eight hours. I smoked 
Phencyclidine (PCP) in the form of a powder two to three times a year, 
which made me feel high for a duration of two to three hours. I orally 
ingested mushrooms two to three times a year, which made me feel high 
for a duration of two to three hours. (GE 6; Tr. 50-51.) 
  
 In 1994, Applicant voluntarily attended a treatment program for his alcohol and 
drug use, to include marijuana dependency. The first two weeks of the program were 
inpatient and the remaining ten weeks were an outpatient program. Applicant contends 
that he had no aftercare requirements and sought no further treatment until 2003. (GE 
6, Tr. 52- 55, 85-86.) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant sought treatment for his addiction to prescribed pain killers he 
had been taking to help deal with degenerative disk disease.  During his treatment, he 
was diagnosed as bi-polar and prescribed lithium sulfate. The medical records also note 
Applicant had been abusing marijuana. He attended approximately six weeks of 
outpatient treatment. After treatment, he attended support groups including Narcotics 
Anonymous and Marijuana Anonymous. He last attended a support group in 2003. (GE 
10; Tr. 37-40; 63-67, 85-93.) 
 
 Subsequently, he switched medical insurances and was required to find a new 
doctor to treat him in 2004. His general practitioner referred him to a psychiatrist. The 
psychiatrist continued to prescribe him lithium sulfate for his bi-polar diagnosis and 
additionally diagnosed him with cannabis dependence, after he disclosed extensive 
marijuana use for over 35 years to her.  At hearing, he testified that he only saw the 
psychiatrist two-to-three times. However, the psychiatrist’s records reflect that Applicant 
met with her five times from March 2004 through October 2004. He returned to his 
general practitioner for treatment after terminating his relationship with the psychiatrist. 
He decided to take himself off the lithium in approximately 2006 since he does not 
believe he is bi-polar. He presented a letter from his treating clinical psychologist that he 
has met with twice since the initial consultation, who opined Applicant “could be 
considered a reliable historian who is not exhibiting any issues consistent with judgment 
or honesty problems.” She also noted “it would appear that since [Applicant] has ceased 
using cannabis and/or any other substances and has learned how to maintain any 
symptoms consistent with depression or mood lability [sic], he is doing quite well at this 
time.” Applicant has signed and notarized a statement indicating that he “will not use 
Cannabis in violation of Federal Law” and he “understand[s] and agree[s] that any future 
use of a controlled substance will result in automatic revocation of my security 
clearance.” (GE 10; GE 11; GE 12; GE 13; AE F; Tr. 37-40; 63-67, 85-93.) 
 
 Applicant’s security clearance applications indicate that he held a secret security 
clearance issued by another government agency in 1988. He testified that he held the 
 
4 
 
clearance for three years. In truth, he applied for a clearance on a July 1989 security 
clearance application. That application included, “Question 15: Medical/Financial a. 
Have you ever used any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen (to include LSD 
or PCP) or Cannabis (to include marijuana or hashish) except as prescribed by a 
licensed physician?” To which Applicant answered “No,” seeking to conceal his prior 
drug use. Applicant admitted he did not list his marijuana use on the application 
“because [he] knew if [he] admitted to it, [he] wouldn’t get the clearance.” (GE 1; TR 60.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by the Defense Security Service in connection with his 
security clearance application in 1990. During this interview, he gave a written 
statement and again falsified information regarding his drug use when he claimed, “I last 
used marijuana in 1973.” Further, he failed to disclose his use of methamphetamines, 
cocaine, heroin, PCP and mushrooms in the same statement. At the hearing, Applicant 
did not deny he made false statements in his March 1990 signed and sworn statement. 
(GE 3; Tr. 61.) 
 
 Applicant’s lies continued on his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (eQIP) dated July 2006. On the eQIP, he was asked, “Section 21. Your 
Medical Record In the last 7 years, have you consulted a mental health professional 
(psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor, etc) or have you consulted with another health 
care provider about a mental health related condition?” and omitted his counseling with 
the psychiatrist from March 2004 through October 2004. The eQIP also asked, “Section 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity: a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 
years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, 
codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, Methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs, and b. Have 
you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement 
officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security clearance; or while 
in a position directly or immediately affecting public safety?” Applicant answered both of 
these questions, “No,” intentionally concealing he was still using marijuana and had 
used marijuana while holding a security clearance in approximately 1989-1991.  (GE 4.) 
 
 In February 2008, Applicant executed and submitted an affidavit to an agent of 
the Office of Personnel Management that indicated, “from the ages of fifteen through 
thirty, I used various drugs. I smoked marijuana out of a bowl and joint and also 
ingested it within various foods on a daily basis.” He deliberately falsified this statement, 
as he knew and sought to conceal that he used marijuana until at least 2009. (GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant completed a second eQIP in October 2009. On the eQIP, he was 
asked, “Section 21. Your Medical Record In the last 7 years, have you consulted a 
health professional regarding an emotional or mental health condition or were you 
hospitalized for such a condition?” and again omitted his counseling with the psychiatrist 
from March 2004 through October 2004. The eQIP also asked, “Section 23. Your Use of 
Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity: a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years,  have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, 
THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
 
5 
 
stimulants (amphetamines, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc), depressants (barbiturates, 
Methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs (including painkillers)? and b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance 
while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly or immediately affecting 
public safety?” Again, Applicant answered, “No,” concealing his marijuana use and his 
drug use while holding a secret clearance, detailed above. 
 
 Applicant presented documentation that shows his work evaluations find him 
“exceptional” on the majority of his evaluation criteria. He also presented photographs 
depicting Applicant in several of his job functions.  (AE A; AE B; AE D.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
6 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR 1.a. through 1.k.). Applicant began using illegal 
substances in the early 1970’s to include marijuana, methamphetamines, cocaine, 
heroin, PCP, mushrooms, mescaline, LSD and hashish. He purports his last use of 
marijuana to have been in summer 2009. He used marijuana while holding a secret 
security clearance from 1989-1991. Additionally, in 2004 he was diagnosed with 
cannabis dependence by his treating psychiatrist. These facts, established through the 
Government’s information and through Applicant’s admissions, raise a security concern 
under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(c) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Although Applicant has not used methamphetamines, cocaine, heroin, PCP, 
mushrooms, mescaline, LSD or hashish for a number of years, his use of marijuana 
through at least 2009 is recent. Applicant’s marijuana use did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. While he asserts that he mainly used marijuana to help him sleep due to 
side effects of prescription medications, he continued his marijuana use long after he 
ceased taking the prescription medications.  Moreover, the fact that he held a security 
clearance did not prevent him from engaging in this questionable conduct. He continued 
to use marijuana after his treatment for marijuana dependency. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
26(a) applies in part, only in regard to his early use of methamphetamines, cocaine, 
heroin, PCP, mushrooms, mescaline, LSD and hashish.  
 
As to AG ¶ 26(b)(4), Applicant provided a signed statement indicating that he will 
not use marijuana in the future. However, Applicant's failure to disclose his illegal drug 
use on his 1989 security clearance application, his 1990 sworn statement, his 2006 
eQIP, his 2008 affidavit, and his 2009 eQIP, undermines the reliability of any such 
statement. Applicant has a history of falsifying documents provided to the Government 
and cannot be taken at his word. Further, he failed to show that he has disassociated 
himself from drug-using contacts, that he has changed his environment in a meaningful 
way, or has an appropriate period of abstinence. No mitigation is available under AG ¶ 
26(b).  
 
With respect to AG ¶ 26(d), Applicant has received treatment for cannabis 
dependency. However, his marijuana use recurred, despite his past treatment. His 
current clinical psychologist opined that he has “ceased using cannabis” and is not 
exhibiting issues with judgment and honesty. Applicant did not present evidence that 
established she treated him for his drug use specifically, or that since 2009 he 
completed any type of prescribed drug treatment program. From his clinical 
psychologist’s letter, it is impossible to tell if she was aware of the full extent of 
Applicant’s drug use and history of falsification. She has only treated Applicant twice in 
approximately a seven month period, after their initial interview in August 2010. Her 
letter is not convincing evidence of successful rehabilitation. Further, due to Applicant’s 
past relapses, not enough time has passed to ascertain whether Applicant will abstain 
for marijuana use in the future, given a 40-year history of use. AG ¶ 26(d) does not 
apply. 
 
 
8 
 
As of the date of the hearing, Applicant claimed he had not used marijuana in 
almost two years. There is no bright line defining an appropriate period of reform and 
rehabilitation. In some cases, two years could be interpreted as a sufficient period of 
abstinence. However, the fact that Applicant used marijuana for approximately 40 years 
and knowingly used marijuana after he was granted a security clearance in 1989, 
indicates Applicant lacks the judgment needed to hold a security clearance and weighs 
against a conclusion that sufficient time has passed. The partial mitigation under AG ¶ 
26 does not overcome the gravity of the fact that Applicant chose to use marijuana while 
he held a security clearance. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant admits to the falsification of his July 1989 Security Clearance 
Application, his 1990 sworn statement, his 2008 affidavit, Section 24.a. and 24.b. on his 
2006 eQIP, and Section 23.a. and 23.b. on his 2009 eQIP. The Government also 
presented sufficient information to establish that Applicant falsified Section 21 on his 
2006 e-QIP and Section 21 on his 2009 eQIP. His explanation that he omitted his 
psychiatrist from these documents unintentionally is simply not credible. The 
 
9 
 
Government has established sufficient concern under AG ¶ 16(a) to disqualify Applicant 
from possessing a clearance.  
 
 Further, Applicant’s 40-years of illegal drug use cast doubts on Applicant’s 
trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. During his 40-years of drug use, Applicant 
chose to engage in the use of illegal substances, while possessing a security clearance. 
His personal conduct displays questionable judgment and creates vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is disqualifying. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification and poor judgment is unmitigated. Falsification of 
information provided to the Government cannot be considered minor. Applicant 
concealed his marijuana use and use of marijuana while possessing a clearance from 
the Government throughout the time he held a secret clearance from 1989 to 1991, and 
in his attempts to get a clearance in 2006 through 2009. He also concealed his 
treatment in 2004 with the psychiatrist. He made no attempts to disclose his drug use 
and treatment and repeatedly lied about the facts when he was confronted with the truth 
during his interviews and subsequent statements. His lies extend from 1989 to the 
interrogatories he completed in 2008, and throughout the hearing in the instant matter, 
as he was not honest about the date of his last use during the hearing. Because of 
Applicant’s long history of lying and his extensive history of marijuana use, I cannot find 
that such behavior is unlikely to recur. While Applicant may be seeking counseling, he 
has only met with his clinical psychologist twice since his initial assessment and he has 
failed to show positive steps to establish he is now reliable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Weighing in Applicant's favor are his successful performance at work and his 
excellent work performance ratings. However, his conduct overall indicates a lack of 
judgment and trustworthiness, and raises doubts as to whether he understands what is 
required of those who hold security clearances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.i.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
