1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-09539
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I deny Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on August 1, 2005. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on June 23, 2010, detailing security concerns under Guideline D,
Sexual Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, that provided the basis for its
preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
AE B - AE E.1
2
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 6, 2010. He answered the SOR on July 15,
2010. Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge and was
prepared to proceed on November 29, 2010. DOHA assigned this case to another
administrative judge on December 14, 2010, and for workload considerations,
reassigned the case to me on March 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
March 15, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 6, 2011. The
Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 5, which were received and
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits
marked as AE A through AE F, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2011. I held the record
open until April 21, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely
submitted AE G through AE K, without objection. The record closed on April 21, 2011.
Procedural Ruling
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on April 5, 2011, less than 15 days before
the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right in ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the
notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15-day
notice. (Tr. 10.)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of
fact.  
Applicant, who is 55 years old, works as a telecommunications technician for a
contractor to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). He has
worked for NASA contractors since October 1998. Applicant’s manager and co-workers
describe him as an individual who follows company policies and procedures and who
pays attention to detail. His manager considers him a “model employee” and his co-
workers consider him an outstanding technician. He works well with his colleagues. He
is well-respected by them. All recommend him for a security clearance and do not
consider him a threat to national security.1
Applicant graduated from high school and attended a vocational school, where
he received training in electronic communications. He also participated in job-related
training over four years, which resulted in a communications engineer certificate. He
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 21-23.2
GE 5.3
Id.4
AE A; AE G; AE H.5
3
attended college, but has not graduated. He married in 1987 and divorced in 1997. He
has one son, who is 23 years old. He has a step-daughter. He is active in his church
and sings in the church choir.  2
On August 3, 2006, Applicant’s 15-year-old cousin spent the night with him. His
cousin and he slept in the same bed. During the night, Applicant engaged in a sexual
act with his young cousin. The cousin reported the incident to his parents several weeks
later, and his parents contacted the police. After an investigation, the grand jury indicted
Applicant for sexual assault of a child, age 14 to 17, a second degree felony in
December 2006.3
Applicant appeared in court on January 3, 2007 with counsel, He pled guilty to a
single charge of sexual assault of a child, age 14 to 17,  a second degree felony. The
court deferred adjudication of guilt and placed Applicant on community supervision for
eight years and fined him $500. The court placed numerous restrictions on his
movement during his probation, including a prohibition against committing additional
offenses; involvement with injurious habits, such as drugs and alcohol; travel
restrictions; random alcohol and drug testing; gainful employment; 350 hours of
community service at the rate of 10 hours a month; numerous fees; alcohol and drug
evaluation; sex offender registration; participation in a sex offender treatment program;
no contact with the victim; no contact with a minor under the age of 17; staying at least
1000 feet from where children gather; no employment involving children; avoid
pornographic material; and 30 days confinement in jail.  4
Applicant’s probation officer verified that Applicant is in compliance with the
conditions of his supervision and probation. His probation officer and his counselor, a
licensed clinical social worker, indicate that he has accepted responsibility for his
actions on August 3, 2006. Once a year, Applicant undergoes a clinical polygraph
examination related to his sexual activities. He provided copies of the polygraph reports
dated May 21, 2009 and September 30, 2010. Both reports reflect questions asked
about his sexual activities with anyone under age 17. The examiner found no deception
by Applicant on his “no” answers.5
Applicant attends weekly group counseling sessions for sex offenders. His
counselor operates this program. Once a year, he meets with his counselor for an
evaluation of his progress. She files a report with his probation officer. His counselor
advises that he has been in treatment since January 2007, has been a model
probationer, cooperated with all treatment efforts, and developed a viable relapse
prevention plan. Based on court records, polygraphs, and urinalysis, Applicant does not
AE A; AE J; Tr. 28, 31.6
AE K; Tr. 24-36.7
4
have any other legal problems, a substance abuse problem, and no diagnosis of mental
illness or personality disorder. He has responded well to the cognitive-behavior
treatment approach to his recovery. In her opinion, Applicant poses a minimal risk to
society for re-offending. She believes that he does not pose a risk for protecting
classified information. In her annual report to his probation officer, she indicated that
Applicant’s overall progress in his treatment was about 60% and outlined the goals he
had achieved, including accepting responsibility for his offense and identifying his
emotional issues. She further made other recommendations related to improving his
progress for successful completion of his treatment program. She provides an overall
favorable prognosis for Applicant.6
At the hearing Applicant described himself as an average guy, “who loves the
Lord, his son, his family, and his country.” He acknowledged his conduct, saying that he
did “something horrible” and describing his conduct as “terrible”. He sincerely regrets his
conduct, and states he will regret his conduct for the rest of his life. He provided specific
information about his weekly therapy sessions and advised about the polygraph tests.
He talked about techniques and boundaries he has developed to prevent a future
offense. His family and church members are aware of his conduct and probationary
status. His brother and one sister attended a chaperone class with him as part of his
treatment. The class also included his counselor and probation officer. The class
provided them with skills to protect young children and to notice Applicant’s behavior.
They love their brother and talk openly with him about this incident. Applicant admitted
an early incident in 1978 when he was 26 years old, which involved sexual
experimentation with a 16-year-old male cousin. He stated that he did not come to the
hearing to defend his conduct, but to show that he was not a security risk. Because he
is a registered sex offender and those closest to him and involved in his life know about
his conduct, he cannot be coerced. He remains on probation.  7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
5
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern as:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
6
AG ¶ 13 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has
been prosecuted;
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a
personality disorder;
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion
or judgment.
In 2006, as an adult, Applicant engaged in sexual conduct with a child between
the ages of 14 and 17, which is a crime. While his conduct did not occur in a public
place, it shows a lack of judgment and placed him in a position of being vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress. The Government established its case under the above
disqualifying conditions.
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have
considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or
duress.
While one incident occurred in 1978, more than 30 years ago, the second
incident happened four and one-half years ago. Because he again became involved in
sexual conduct with a child, AG ¶ 14(b) is not applicable. 
Applicant is currently participating in a sex offender’s treatment program and has
been in this program for more than four years. He accepted responsibility for his
conduct in 2006 and in 1978. He discusses his conduct with his family members and
has made his church members aware of what he has done. As required, he registered
as a sex offender. He complies with the requirements of his probation. With his
openness about his conduct and his registration as a sex offender, there is little
likelihood that he can be coerced, pressured, exploited, or placed under duress for his
past sexual conduct. AG ¶ 14(c) has some applicability.
7
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.
Applicant pled guilty to a second degree felony offense in 2007 after he engaged
in a sexual act with his 15-year-old cousin. The court placed him on probation for eight
years, which will end in January 2015. The Government has established the above
disqualifying conditions.
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have
considered all the mitigating conditions, and especially the following:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
More than 30 years has elapsed since the first incident involving sexual conduct
with a child between the age of 14 and 17. While this incident occurred many years ago,
Applicant again engaged in sexual conduct with an underage child less than five years
ago, which raises concerns about his judgment. Based on the statements from his
manager and co-workers, his reliability and trustworthiness at work are not an issue.
Applicant admitted his conduct in court and has accepted responsibility for his
actions. He attends his group therapy sessions every week and has willingly
participated in these sessions. He works with his counselor on emotional issues to
prevent a reoccurrence. He works steadily and is highly respected at his job for his
technical skills. He complies with the requirements of his probation. His counselor and
8
family do not consider him a threat. He has a strong support system as he progresses
forward in his treatment and management of his conduct. Applicant has presented
strong evidence that he is being rehabilitated. However, he still remains on probation.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
sexual conduct with his 15-year-old cousin in 2006 and with a 16-year-old cousin in
1978 is serious and egregious. He recognizes this, and he has accepted responsibility
for his conduct. He willingly and actively participates in his group therapy sessions. With
the assistance of his counselor and therapy sessions, he has developed a strong
support system through his family and church to help him manage his emotions in a
positive way, which will prevent a future reoccurrence. He has complied with all the
many requirements of his probation, including no involvement with children 17 or
younger and registering as a sex offender. He is to be commended for the efforts he
has taken and his success over the last four years in understanding his behavior. He is
well-respected at his job. The evidence in this case reflects that he cannot be coerced,
exploited, pressured or placed under duress for his sexual and criminal conduct.
9
However, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised because he
remains on probation, which does not end until January 2015. Of concern, is the fact
that he engaged in wrongful conduct, not once, but twice. The second occurrence
happened many years after the first, and this fact alone raises concerns about his
judgment. He needs additional time and treatment to learn to fully manage his emotions
in stressful situations and to learn to prevent his conduct in the future.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his sexual and
criminal conduct under Guidelines D and J.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
