1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-11852
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire,
May 10, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June  23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines D and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
On August 18, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was initially assigned to
another Administrative Judge. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 28, 2010,
and the hearing was scheduled for November 16, 2010. Because of scheduling conflict,
a second notice of hearing was issued on November 8, 2010, and the hearing was held,
as scheduled for December 16, 2010. The case was assigned to this Administrative
Judge on December 7, 2010. 
2
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received and entered
into evidence without objection without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and submitted Exhibits A through D at the time of hearing, which were also entered into
evidence without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
January 3, 2011, to submit additional evidence.  I received a one page character letter,
identified as Exhibit E, and entered into evidence without objection. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on December 29, 2010. Based upon a review of the case
file, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 2.a.
He denied 1.e., 1.f., and parts of 2.b. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein
as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 61 years old. He is married, and he has two children. He received a
Bachelors Degree in Electrical Engineering. Applicant is employed by a defense
contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in
the defense sector. He indicated that he plans to retire in March 2011, but he is
considering working on a casual basis after his retirement. (Tr at 21-22.)
Paragraph 1 (Guideline D - Sexual Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in sexual behavior that is either criminal, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgement or discretion, or which may
subject an individual to undue influence or coercion.  
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant solicited sex from prostitutes from
about the 1970s to at least 1990.  As reviewed above, Applicant admitted this allegation
in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant estimated that his last solicitation of a prostitute
was between three and five years ago. (Tr at 22.) He estimated that he has solicited a
prostitute between 100 and 200 times, and continued to do this even during his period
of attending a 12 step sexual recovery program. He testified that his solicitation has
gradually decreased over the years, and, “It has really gotten quite rare these days.” (Tr
at 41-42, 58.) 
1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant engaged in illegal activity of a sexual
nature, to include exhibitionism, voyeurism, unauthorized touching, and masturbation
from about the 1970s to at least 1990. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.
During Applicant’s testimony, it was clarified by his attorney that the allegation of
3
masturbation referred to Applicant masturbating in public. He estimated that he last
engaged in the conduct listed in this subparagraph between five and 10 years ago. (Tr
at 22-23.) He also estimated that he engaged in public masturbation “a couple of
hundred times.” (Tr at 55.)
1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in about 1990 and
charged with Solicitation of a Prostitute.  He was found guilty and placed on probation.
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.
1.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in about 1991 and
charged with (1) Indecent Exposure, and (2) Making False Statement to the Police. He
pled guilty to Disturbing the Peace and was fined and placed on three years probation.
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR and confirmed it during his testimony. (Tr
at 23-24.) This arrest occurred as a result of Applicant masturbating in his vehicle, and a
woman claiming that he was engaged in indecent exposure. (Tr at 43.) 
1.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant possessed child pornography prior to
1999. Applicant denied this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant testified that he denied
this allegation because he had “old nudist magazines” that included people of all ages,
including children who were nude, but no sexual activity was depicted. He also testified
that he had never had an interest in child pornography, and he had not obtained these
magazines with the purpose of viewing underage people in sexual positions.  (Tr at 24-
25, 45.) 
1.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant utilizes the services of a massage
parlor that offers the additional services of a sexual nature three to four times a year.
Applicant denied this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant testified that he denied this
allegation, which was based upon a statement he made, Exhibit 3, because his “slips,”
as he described them, involved different forms of breaking the definitions of abstinence
from his sexual recovery program called Sex Addicts Anonymous. (Tr at 58.) These
included more than massage parlor visits alone; they also included going to sexual
video arcades, getting lap dances at a strip club, or going to a hostess dance club. All of
these activities were included in his “slips.” (Tr at 27-30.)
Applicant made the distinction between acts that may not be illegal, such as
going to sexual video arcades, getting lap dances at a strip club, or going to a hostess
dance club, but they were not allowed on his 12 step program, so by engaging in these
activities he violated the tenets of his sexual recovery program. This would be similar to
a member of alcoholics anonymous  who consumes alcohol.
Applicant testified that he had not frequented massage parlors within the last
year before the hearing, but upon reflection, he did concede that he did go to a
massage parlor in March 2010. (Tr at 26-30.) This massage included sexual
gratification. Applicant first testified he was not seeking this service, but when it was
offered, he could not refuse because he could not control his compulsion.(Tr at 47, 49.)
Upon further examination, Applicant conceded that he had anticipated this massage
may include sexual activity, and even though he was aware that he was being
4
investigated as part of his security clearance application, he could not overcome his
addiction. (Tr at 60-63.) He also received a lap dance at around the same time frame. 
Applicant testified that he considers himself a sexual addict. He began a 12 step
program for sexual addicts in 1990, which he continues to attend weekly. He believes
the program has helped him with his addiction. He stated that his sexual behavior has
diminished over the years because of this program and also as he has aged he is less
inclined to engage in this conduct. He and his wife also have been attending a 12 step
sexual addict program for couples during the past 16 years. He plans to continue
attending both programs and does not plan to engage in the sexual conduct that is the
subject of this case in the future.  (Tr at 31-35, 67.) 
Applicant testified that his wife is aware of his sexual activity, and I note that she
was present at the hearing and heard all of the testimony. He estimated that three
people at his place of employment are also aware of his sexual conduct. (Tr at 35-36.)
Applicant does supervise three employees, and he testified that none of them was
aware of his sexual conduct. (Tr at 51.) He also testified that his two children, who are
22 and 17, his three brothers, and his one sister are not aware of the full extent of
sexual conduct, although they are aware that he attends a 12 step program. (Tr at 53.)
He indicated that if someone threatened to inform his children of his sexual activities, he
would inform the authorities. (Tr at 56.)
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
         2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was denied program access by another
Government agency in about April 1999 due to criminal conduct, sexual behavior, and
personal conduct. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.
2.b. It is alleged in the SOR Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 1,
above, constitutes the kind of behavior that is of concern to the Government, as it
exhibits questionable judgement, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and untrustworthiness.  Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., above.
Mitigation
Applicant introduced a document titled “”Intent to Retire On” which indicated that
he notified his employer that he planned to retire on March 1, 2011. (Exhibit A.) 
He also introduced a letter from a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist, dated
December 13, 2010, who met with Applicant on three occasions. (Exhibit B.) She
reviewed the information that he provided to her and wrote, “It is also my professional
assessment, based on three interviews with [Applicant] that he is unlikely to commit any
illegal sexual behavior. He has shown an ongoing commitment to his sexual recovery
5
and he and his wife are both active in working with other couples as part of their own
recovery.” In reviewing this report, including Applicant’s history, I note there is no
mention of Applicant receiving the sexual massage or the lap dance in 2010, nor is
there any discussion about Applicant’s amount of solicitation of prostitution (100 to 200
times) or his public masturbation (200 times), so I do not know if this therapist was
aware of Applicant’s full sexual history. Therefore, I do not give this report a great deal
of weight. 
Applicant submitted two letters of reference. The first one is from Applicant’s line
manager for the past three years, who has known Applicant for almost 20 years. He
wrote he “always regarded [Applicant] as being reliable and trustworthy, and have never
encountered any reason to doubt his loyalty or suitability to work on national security
programs.”  No mention was made of Applicant’s sexual issues. (Exhibit D.) The second
letter was from Applicant’s sponsor in Sexual Addicts Anonymous, who has known him
for 20 years. He confirmed that Applicant is conscientious in attending the meetings and
working the 12 step program. (Exhibit E.) 
Applicant also submitted his performance evaluations signed in 2008 and 2009.
(Exhibit C.) He received Satisfactory rather than Unsatisfactory for both years regarding
“Safeguarding of Classified Information” and “Maintaining Safe Work Environment.”
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
6
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Conduct
It has been established by substantial evidence that Applicant engaged in the
kind of sexual behavior that is of concern to the Government, as it is criminal conduct,
and it exhibits a lack of discretion and good judgement.  Applicant engaged in the
solicitation of prostitution between 100 and 200 times and public masturbation on 200
occasions. Even when he was aware that he was being investigated because of his
security clearance, he engaged in sexual massage and a lap dance in 2010.  While it
appears that he would like to abstain from this conduct, and the conduct has diminished
in frequency, when I consider the frequency and longevity of his sexual history and the
fact that he continues to have “slips” from his sexual 12 step program, I cannot conclude
that he has established a pattern of significant sexual abstinence.   
Under AG ¶  13 (a) “sexual behavior that is of criminal nature, whether or not the
individual has been prosecuted” applies to the facts of this case. AG ¶ 13 (d) also
applies because Applicant “engaged in sexual behavior that reflects lack of discretion or
judgement.”  No mitigating condition under AG ¶ 14 can be found to apply here.
Paragraph 1, Guideline D is found against Applicant. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant engaged in
conduct, which considered as a whole, exhibits questionable judgement, unreliability,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations and a lack of candor. I resolve
Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and no Mitigating Condition is
applicable regarding Applicant’s sexual conduct over many years. I find that the record
evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:            Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
