  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08230 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen born in Iran, maintains possession of an 
Iranian passport. He has a close relationship with his mother who is a citizen and 
resident of Iran. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline C, foreign preference and Guideline B, foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 13, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline C, foreign preference and Guideline B, foreign influence. 
  
 On August 2, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 12, 2010, I was assigned the case. On November 2, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on November 9, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. On November 19, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer, he admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old design engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 1981, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. In March 
1986, he became a U.S. citizen and in 1997, he obtained a U.S. passport. (Tr. 28, Ex. 
3) In May 2008, he renewed his Iranian passport, which expires in June 2013. (Ex. 1, 3) 
In November 2007, Applicant visited Iran for two weeks just before and following his 
father’s death. One year later on the one-year anniversary of his father’s death, he 
visited Iran for a two-week period in November and December 2008. (Ex. 2) 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran and lived there for 18 years. It was his father’s desire 
that Applicant and his brother study abroad. (Tr. 29) In 1974, Applicant came to the 
United States as a student planning to return to Iran following graduation and work in 
his father’s home appliance factory. (Tr. 26, Ex. 2) In 1979, the Iranian Islamic 
Revolution occurred, and in 1980, war started between Iran and Iraq, which lasted until 
1988. His father told him not to return to Iran. (Tr. 26) In 1981, he obtained a position 
with his current company.  
 
 From 1981 to 1997, Applicant’s parents visited him in the United States every 
two to three years, sometimes staying for a year. (Tr. 27, 68) His parents would divide 
their stay between him and his brother, who also lived in the United States. (Tr. 31) In 
1997, he obtained an Iranian passport because his parents were getting older and were 
no longer able to visit him in the United States. (Tr. 20) Before 1997, the only current 
 
3 
 
ars. 
                                                          
passport was his U.S. passport. (Tr. 21) His prior Iranian passport2 had expired 
because he had no intention of ever returning to Iran. (Tr. 27) At that time, he had been 
away from Iran for 28 or 29 ye
 
 In March 1991, Applicant married.3 His wife, an accountant, lives with him in the 
United States. She is a dual Iranian and U.S. citizen who acquired her U.S citizenship in 
1994 or 1995. (Tr. 39, 40) His wife had come to the United States in 1986 or 1987 as a 
student. She obtained degrees in accounting and finance. (Tr. 42) Her father and 
mother were Iranian citizens, but are now deceased. (Tr. 46) His wife’s five or six 
brothers live in the United States and are doctors and architects. (Tr. 30, 64) Applicant 
is not close to his wife’s brothers or his wife’s two or three sisters. Applicant does not 
know his sister-in-laws’ professions or that of their spouses. One sister lives in 
Germany, one in Iran, and another, who lived in Iran, is now dead. (Tr. 42) With that 
sister’s death, his wife keeps in touch with her sister’s daughter, her niece, a student. 
(Ex. 2) His wife is not close with her siblings. (Tr. 43) Applicant has no contact with his 
wife’s siblings. (Tr. 69)  
 
 In 2004, Applicant’s wife visited Iran. She had previously visited Iran 
approximately ten years before in 1993 or 1994. (Ex. 2) She has visited Iran two or 
three times in the last 20 years. (Tr. 39) She visited Iran shortly before her mother’s 
death. (Tr. 65) His wife’s Iranian passport has not been renewed since it expired. (Tr. 
73) Applicant’s children were born in the United States in April 1992 and September 
1984, and are dual Iranian and U.S citizens. In 2004, his children accompanied by his 
wife visited their grandparents. His son is attending university in the United States and 
his daughter is a high school junior. (Tr. 29) His son, now of military age, would be 
subject to military service should he return to Iran. His son has no desire to return to 
Iran. (Tr. 67)  
 
 Applicant’s mother, a homemaker, is a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant 
provides no financial assistance to his mother. His father owed factories and was 
financially well off. (Tr. 47) His mother is a registered alien who, until 2000, visited the 
United States every two or three years. Applicant talks with his mother every week or 
every other week by telephone. His mother is 81 years old and suffers from arthritis and 
she is no longer able to travel to the United States. (Tr. 63) If he were to renounce his 
Iranian citizenship, he could not visit his mother in Iran. The current relationship 
between Iran and the United States does not allow him to visit Iran on a U.S. passport. 
(Ex. 2) As long as his mother is alive, he will maintain his Iranian passport so he can 
visit her, should the need arise. (Tr. 38, 72) 
 
2 Applicant’s passport was issued by the Shah’s administration. He had no desire to have a new passport 
issued by the current Iranian government.  
 
3 Applicant was previously married, from November 1977 to November 1982, to a citizen of the 
Philippines. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s brother, who owns an automobile mechanic shop, is a U.S. citizen 
living in the United States. (Tr. 37) Applicant talks weekly with his brother. His brother 
came to the United States as a student, obtaining an electrical engineering degree. (Tr. 
48) His brother’s children were born in and currently live in the United States. His 
brother last visited Iran in 2000. (Tr. 47) Applicant’s two sisters are Iranian citizens living 
near his mother in Iran. Both are homemakers. One is married to a carpet merchant and 
the other to a clothing store owner. (51, 52) He talks to his sisters every six months to 
once a year. (Tr. 50, Ex. 2) In the last 30 years, he has spent two or three days visiting 
them. (Tr. 51) He has never provided his sisters with financial support. (Tr. 53)  
 
 In November 2007, upon the death of his father, Applicant inherited one-half 
interest in a $60,000 condominium located in Iran. (Tr. 53) The property is rented and 
the rent goes to his mother. His uncle, a citizen and resident of Iran, manages the 
property. (Ex. 2) His uncle obtained his degree from a west coast university and is a 
university professor in Iran. Applicant talks with his uncle annually. (Tr. 58) 
 
 Applicant’s net worth in the United States is approximately one million dollars. 
(Tr. 60) His only foreign asset is the half interest in the condominium. He does not 
consider himself an Iranian citizen. He has never voted in a foreign election. (Tr. 34) 
Since 1974, he has visited Iran three or four times. (Tr. 36) He has no obligation or 
allegiance to Iran or its government. (Ex. 2) 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The United States has not had 
diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has 
stated that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than 
from Iran.”  
 
 The United States Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian 
behavior as: 
 
$ Iran=s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction; 
$ Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
$ Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process;  
$ Its dismal human rights record; and 
$ Iran=s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.4 
 
4United States Department of State; Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 – State Sponsors of 
Terrorism Overview, dated April 30, 2009, United States Department of State; State Sponsors of 
Terrorism. (Hearing Exhibits) 
 
5 
 
 The United States has designated and characterized Iran as the most active 
state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
The Government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against 
the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary arrest and 
detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; severe 
restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement and 
privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and legal 
and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 Travel to Iran remains problematic. The State Department continues to warn U.S. 
citizens to consider carefully the risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in 
Iran and the children of Iranian citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do 
not consider themselves Iranian—are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, 
since Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these 
individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an 
Iranian passport, unless the Iranian government has recognized a formal renunciation 
or loss of Iranian citizenship. United States and Iranian dual nationals have been denied 
permission to enter or depart Iran using their U.S. passport; they even had their U.S. 
passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. United States and Iranian dual citizens 
have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. Iranian security 
personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, telephones and 
fax machines may be monitored, and personnel possessions in hotel rooms may be 
searched. 
 
 Some elements of the Iranian government and population remain hostile to the 
United States. Consequently, American citizens may be subject to harassment or arrest 
while traveling or residing in Iran. The United States Government does not currently 
have diplomatic or consular relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran, and therefore, 
cannot provide protection or routine consular services to American citizens in Iran. The 
Swiss Government, acting through its Embassy in Tehran, serves as protecting power 
for United States interests in Iran. Neither U. S. passports nor visas to the United States 
are issued in Tehran.  
 
 The Iranian government generally does not permit the Swiss to provide protective 
services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals. In addition, U.S. citizens of 
Iranian origin who are considered by Iran to be Iranian citizens have been detained and 
harassed by Iranian authorities. Nevertheless, Iran is not a known collector of U.S. 
intelligence or sensitive economic information, nor is it known to target U.S. citizens to 
obtain protected information.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
6 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
7 
 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 10 
potentially applies in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.  
 
In 1986, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. However, in 1997, he obtained an 
Iranian passport, which he renewed in 2008. His current Iranian passport does not 
expire until 2013. This action was taken after he became a U.S. citizen. The condition in 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) is disqualifying.  
 
 As long as his mother is alive, Applicant will maintain his Iranian passport to be 
able to visit her. Applicant acquired the Iranian passport not to increase his ties to Iran, 
but, he asserts, solely to visit his 81-year-old mother who suffers from arthritis and is no 
longer able to travel to the United States. However, there is no restriction on the travel 
permitted by his Iranian passport. The current relationship between Iran and the United 
States does not allow him to visit Iran on a U.S. passport. If he were to renounce his 
Iranian citizenship, he could not visit his mother in Iran.  
 
 Applicant does not intend to relinquish his Iranian passport. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply, and foreign preference concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
  
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case are: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
. . . 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s relationship to his mother 
living in Iran. Iran is considered to be an extraordinary threat to the national security, 
foreign policy, and economy of the United States. Iran has been designated a state 
sponsor of terrorism since 1984, because of its open sponsorship of terrorism. Iran 
disregards the United Nations Security Council restrictions on its nuclear program. It 
has repeatedly been in non-compliance with the International Atomic Energy Agency 
program's international obligations, and it continues with its ambition to develop nuclear 
weapons, against the objections of many nations. Iran also has an extensive record of 
human rights violations. Furthermore, Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military 
equipment and other sensitive technology. It is also enhancing its focus on U.S. 
intelligence activities and relies on foreign intelligence partnerships to extend its 
capabilities.  
 
Finally, the United States has not had diplomatic ties or consular relations with 
Iran since Iran’s revolution in 1979. The Iranian government does not recognize dual 
nationality and will treat Iranian and U.S. dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. The 
United States cannot provide protection or routine consular relations to American 
citizens in Iran. Iranian authorities have prevented a number of American citizens, who 
have traveled to Iran for personal reasons, from leaving, and in some cases have 
detained, interrogated, and imprisoned them.  
 
Applicant has a close relationship with his mother and communicates weekly or 
bi-weekly with her. He has limited contact with his two sisters, who are also citizens and 
residents of Iran. His contact with his sisters is limited to once or twice a year. His wife’s 
sisters are citizens and residents of Iran, but Applicant has no contact with them and his 
wife has minimal contact with her siblings. On his father’s death in 2007, he inherited 
 
9 
 
half interest in a $60,000 condominium in Iran. In 2007, Applicant visited Iran for two 
weeks just before and following his father’s death and again in 2008, on the anniversary 
of his father’s death. 
 
Applicant has strong ties of affection for, or obligation to, his mother. His 
relationship with his mother is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His relationship with his 
mother in Iran creates a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology.” For example, if the Iranian government or terrorists in Iran 
wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on his mother. Applicant 
would then be subject to indirect coercion and sensitive or classified information could 
potentially be compromised. The disqualifying factors in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. The 
disqualifying factor in AG ¶ 7(e) must also be considered. 
 
 Four of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
 
10 
 
                                                          
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the Government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. The complicated, 
relationship of Iran with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with his mother 
and sisters does not pose a security risk and he is not in a position to be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and these three persons.5 With its human 
rights record, and political, economic and military rivalry with the United States, it is 
conceivable that Iran would target any Iranian citizen or former citizen living in the 
United States in an attempt to gather valuable information. 
 
There is no evidence that terrorists or the Iranian government have approached 
or threatened Applicant or his Iranian relatives for any reason. There is no evidence that 
his mother or siblings living in Iran currently engage in activities which would bring 
attention to them or that they or other Iranian elements are even aware of his work. As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that his relatives living in Iran or he would be targets 
for coercion or exploitation. There is no evidence any of his foreign relatives currently 
works or ever worked for the Iranian government, military, or news media, or any other 
foreign government. None of his relatives are involved with organizations which seek to 
harm the United States  
 
Applicant’s close relationship with his mother is an important positive reflection of 
his character, but the same close relationship raises security concerns for possible 
foreign influence. The mitigating conditions listed AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied 
with respect to Applicant’s mother. His relationship with his mother remains a concern. I 
find against him as to SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do apply to his sisters. 
Neither sister is in position connected with the Iranian government or engaged in 
activities that would likely cause Applicant to be exploited or placed in a position of 
having to choose between them and the United States. His infrequent contacts (once or 
twice a year) and his relationship with his sisters, which is not close, pose a low 
5An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a heavier burden to overcome than an applicant with 
relatives living in Russia. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) (stating an 
applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when parents and 
siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very 
heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR Case No. 07-12471 
at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (stating “Between January 9, 2007 and January 18, 2008, the Appeal Board 
decided 36 appeals involving Iran under the old guidelines, and it reversed 20 decisions granting 
clearances and affirmed 15 decisions denying clearances.” And listing at 9 n.1 the pertinent cases). The 
Appeal Board has also articulated a “heightened risk” or “very heavy burden” in People’s Republic of 
China (PRC) cases because of that country’s hostility to the United States and aggressive intelligence 
collection efforts. See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (articulating “very heavy 
burden” standard and reversing grant of clearance in case involving family members living in the PRC); 
ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 (App. Bd. May 
9, 2008). 
 
11 
 
potential for forcing him to choose between the United States and Iran. He met his 
burden of showing there is little likelihood that his relationship with his sisters could 
create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG & 8(a) cannot be fully applied 
because of Iran’s hostile relationship with the United States and Iran’s negative human 
rights record, which makes it more likely that Iran would violate the law to gain classified 
information. I find for him as to SOR ¶ 2.b because AG & 8(b) is fully applicable. 
 
Applicant has a half interest in a condominium he inherited in 2007 upon his 
father’s death. The condominium is worth approximately $60,000 and all rental income 
generated goes to his mother. He is not involved in the rental management of the 
property, which is handled by his uncle, and it is Applicant’s only foreign asset. He is 
financially stable, does not need compensation from the property, and seeks none. His 
net worth in the United States is approximately a million dollars. When the value of the 
Iranian property is compared to his United States assets, that property is not a 
“substantial property interest.” The minimal value of the foreign property is such that it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, 
or pressure him. The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 8(f) applies. I find for him as to SOR ¶ 
2.c. 
 
 Since 1974, when Applicant came to the United States as a student, he has 
visited Iran for only three or four times. His most recent trips were two weeks each, one 
in 2007, when his father was seriously ill and then died, and the other in 2008, on the 
one year anniversary of his father’s death. He has not lived in Iran for 36 years. He has 
no intention of ever living there. The security significance of these two recent trips is 
minimal. I find for him as to SOR ¶ 2.d. 
 
 In sum, the primary foreign influence security concern is Applicant’s close 
relationship with his mother living in Iran, who is readily available for coercion or 
attempts to influence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
12 
 
                                                          
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. A Guideline B and C decision 
concerning Iran must take into consideration the geopolitical situation in that country, as 
well as the dangers existing in Iran.6  
  
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant immigrated to the United 
States in 1974; became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1986; has been successfully living 
the American dream for 36 years; and worked for a government contractor since 1981. 
There is no evidence of any misconduct or security violations. Applicant is considered to 
be a productive employee and a loyal American. Applicant is fully entrenched in the 
United States and is unlikely to compromise his life here. He is a mature person. Since 
leaving Iran at age 18, he has returned to Iran only three or four times. He does not 
intent to return to Iran. His family, most of his property and future are in the United 
States  
 
There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. 
Applicant’s spouse has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1994. His two children 
were born in the United States. Both he and his wife earned degrees from U.S. 
institutions. He is a successful member of the business community, providing services 
to the United States Government. His property in the United States greatly exceeds the 
value of his share of the condominium in Iran. The record contains no derogatory 
information about him. These factors show responsibility and some mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, there are more substantial circumstances that weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis. I have considered the Iranian government’s 
hostile relationship with the United States and unwillingness to comply with international 
law and respect the human rights of Iranian citizens and former Iranian citizens. In 
1997, Applicant obtained an Iranian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. In 2008, he 
renewed that passport, which does not expire until June 2013. He retains possession of 
that Iranian passport. Additionally, Applicant’s contact with his mother in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
that he has not mitigated. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
13 
 
the security concerns arising from his foreign influence and foreign preference 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b and d:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
