                                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 09-03693 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eiser, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines E, 
Personal Conduct, K, Handling Protected Information, and M, Use of information 
Technology Systems. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E, K and M. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 18, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2011. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on April 13, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
May 10, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. GE 1 through 3 and 
5 through 7 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant objected to GE 4. 
The objection was overruled and GE 4 was admitted into evidence. Applicant offered 
exhibits (AE) A and B. They were admitted into evidence without objections. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 16, 2011.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel withdrew SOR allegation ¶ 1.d. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. His admissions 
are included in the findings of facts. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He married in 1996 and has one child. He is an 
engineer, and has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 1999. He 
has a bachelor’s and a master’s degree. He holds a top secret security clearance.1 
 
 Applicant began working for Company A in approximately 1988. Company A was 
bought by Company B. Applicant continued his employment with Company B. While 
working for Company B, he transferred to a new site location. He packed up his 
belongings from his office, taking personal items and other work-related items, including 
documents and magnetic tapes that stored data, to assist him in his new assignment. 
Applicant did not review what was on the tapes. Classified, proprietary and sensitive 
items are distinctively marked. None of the items he packed were marked as classified, 
proprietary, or sensitive. In his job, he was not required to secure any of the material to 
which he had access. In 1992, Applicant ceased employment with Company B and 
packed his belongings, to include four or five boxes and approximately 20 pieces of 
magnetic media, and took them home.2  
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor, when he worked at Company A, Witness X, 
testified on his behalf. He explained that when Applicant worked at Company A he had 
complete access to all of the company’s information regarding the engineering systems. 
He carried a “beeper” and was trusted to access the company at all times. While 
working at Company A, Applicant did not violate any of the company’s rules or policies. 
When he transferred sites, he was permitted to take the company’s materials with him. 
The policy at the time was that all proprietary property was clearly labeled. He credibly 
testified that while he supervised Applicant, there was not proprietary or sensitive 
1 Tr. 91-93. 
 
2 Tr. 76-87. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
information or property under his control or Applicant’s. He explained that the 
proprietary information and documents that did exist, were not stored on computer disks 
or magnetic tapes, but rather were on drawings and within contract proposals. The 
magnetic tapes that existed were used as back-ups for data, and were locked in 
temperature-controlled rooms. Computer manuals and computer training manuals, were 
not proprietary or sensitive, and were available to the general public from the 
manufacturer. Witness X could not estimate the worth of the tapes and disks and did not 
know how the valued was determined. There is no evidence that any of the materials 
Applicant retained in the boxes were proprietary or sensitive.3  
 
 Witness X also provided a character letter in support of Applicant. In it he 
described Applicant “to be of excellent character, reliable, dependable, and trustworthy.” 
He further noted: 
 
When employees elect to leave a company and move on, they clean out 
their cubicles, desk, filing cabinets, etc. During such a cleaning it is not 
uncommon for them to pack up listings of old code they’ve written, flow 
diagrams, etc., capturing as they do their own intellectual creations. I’ve 
never seen this as a violation of company policy; rather I see it as part of 
the normal course of a professional career.4  
 
 Applicant then began working for Company C in 1992. As part of a subcontract 
with Company C, Applicant worked directly for Company D. When his assignment with 
Company D was completed, he returned to Company C. He brought with him four 
separate computer programs in the form of paper print-outs that referenced the work he 
completed for Company D. He saved it in the event Company D had any questions or 
troubles, so he could answer them. He did not believe he took any proprietary or 
sensitive documents with him from Company D when he returned to Company C. He 
did not believe he was violating any rules or regulations, or that what he did was wrong. 
There is no evidence that any of these materials were proprietary or sensitive. He did 
not bring this material home, but rather it remained with Company C.5 
 
 From 1996 to 1998, Applicant worked for Company E. When he left his 
employment with Company E, he took with him approximately 50 diskettes. Except for 
two of the diskettes, the others were free diskettes received from America On-line (AOL) 
soliciting subscriptions to their service. Applicant had collected the AOL diskettes and 
erased the data on them and was going to use them for personal use at a later time. 
The two remaining diskettes contained information on projects Applicant had worked on. 
They included sample websites he developed for the company. The samples on the 
diskettes were a small part of information that was available to the public as “open 
3 Tr. 49-74. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 102-109, 112, 177-178. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
source” on the internet. None of the information was proprietary or sensitive. He 
provided the disks to government investigators during his background investigation. The 
disks were returned to him.6  
 
 As part of a background investigation for access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI), conducted by another government agency, Applicant was required to 
complete a polygraph examination. Applicant stated that the polygrapher believed he 
was withholding information. The polygrapher asked if there may have been something 
he took or did he steal something? Applicant credibly testified that he was only aware of 
things he took from his employers, so he speculated that perhaps contained in some of 
the disks there might be proprietary or sensitive information that may be causing the 
issue with the polygraph. He credibly testified that he was not aware that there actually 
was proprietary or sensitive information, but he was grasping at possibilities to appease 
the polygrapher. He had not looked at the disks or tapes that he had taken to see what 
was on them. Applicant was denied access to SCI by the government agency. He did 
not appeal the denial because he was working on a different project that did not require 
access to SCI.7  
 
 Regarding SOR 1.a, Applicant admitted he had four to five boxes and 
approximately 20 magnetic media at his home. When asked by the polygrapher what 
the value of it was, Applicant told him he did not know. The polygraph examiner 
continued to press him for a value so he guessed its value based on man-hours to 
develop the data on the medium, and then he guessed a dollar figure. He applied the 
same guesstimate formula when determining a dollar figure under the other allegations. 
He stated he used his best judgment to take items he believed he was authorized to 
take at the time.8 
 
 In August 2001, on three occasions, Applicant accessed a pornographic website 
on his employer’s computer, after work hours. His supervisor confronted him and 
Applicant admitted he accessed the sites. It was against company policy, but Applicant 
stated he was unaware that it was prohibited because it was after hours. He was going 
through a difficult period with his wife, who had recently given birth to their son. He 
received a warning letter from his supervisor and there have been no other incidents. 
Applicant’s wife is aware of the incidents.9 
 
 Applicant joined his current employer in 1999, and has been promoted to 
positions of increased responsibility, from a technical staff member, group supervisor for 
40 employees, and now a project manager. He was responsible for ensuring all of his 
subordinates received proper security training. He prepared them for periodic security 
6 Tr. 118-133,163-166. 
 
7 Tr.87-95, 106-108, 114, 147-150, 174. 
 
8 Tr. 109-111, 176 
 
9 Tr. 133-137, 167-168, 175; GE 6, 7. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
inspections. He was required to sign a nondisclosure agreement because of his access 
to proprietary information. He provided numerous letters from people he has worked for 
commenting on his excellent work ethic and expressing their gratitude for his 
accomplishments and devotion. He is recognized for his demonstrated technical 
leadership and managerial skills.10 
 
 Applicant has handled classified information in the past. He credibly testified that 
he ensured he complied with the proper procedures for transferring and handling 
classified data. A colleague provided a character letter for Applicant and detailed her 
first-hand knowledge of Applicant’s adherence to security guidelines. In December 
2008, Applicant was responsible for the coordination and delivery of classified laptop 
computers from his employer to the employer’s sponsor. He met with the security 
officers to ensure all steps were properly executed and the required documents were 
completed. He ensured delivery and receipt was completed. He was applauded for the 
success of the delivery and receipt. In May 2009, he was again trusted with the 
transportation of classified laptops to a remote site to support a field test. Applicant was 
required to coordinate with his employer’s security personnel and the recipient’s security 
personnel to ensure proper procedures were followed. Through his tireless efforts, the 
transfer was successful.11  
 
 In 2010, Applicant’s employer suffered a cyber attack that forced it to create new 
security policies. Applicant took the initiative to encrypt all of its program-critical files, in 
accordance with the policies, to prevent any future compromise. The company had 
multiple terabytes of data and itwas not a small undertaking. Applicant was “solely 
responsible for the program’s security compliance and conducted it flawlessly.”12 
 
 Applicant recently received an email with an attachment on an unclassified 
computer. He was concerned the attachment might be classified and immediately 
advised his supervisor of his concern. The computer was immediately locked down and 
a security review was conducted. It was determined the attachment was sensitive. The 
email and attachment were removed from the computer and from a smart phone 
device.13  
 
 During a walk-through of his spaces at work, Applicant noted an area that had 
been left unsecured with unmarked and marked classified documents. He followed 
proper protocol and shredded the documents. He determined who the responsible for 
leaving the area unsecured and discussed the issue with him. In addition, he advised 
the person’s supervisor of the incident.14  
10 Tr. 137-147; AE B. 
 
11 Tr. 137-147; AE A  
 
12 AE A. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 A witness who testified on behalf of Applicant has known him since 1985. After 
graduation from college they both worked for the same employer and shared an 
apartment. They worked together for two other companies. He described Applicant as a 
person with high integrity and a strong work ethic. He never had any performance 
problems, was easy to work with, and was respected by the staff. He noted:  
 
It should be noted that it is common practice for staff to leave a company 
with some sample work they may have developed such as software 
fragments provided that it is not proprietary or sensitive information and 
was retained simply as a basis for providing examples on practical 
development techniques to apply to future jobs. This is not unlike retaining 
software samples developed in school to apply on future academic and 
work activities.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
15 Tr. 37-46; AE A. 
 
7 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
 
8 
 
 
but is not limited to considerations of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary 
information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information. . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time and resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 I have considered the above disqualifying conditions and carefully considered all 
of the evidence presented. I conclude there is insufficient reliable evidence to conclude 
Applicant knowingly, deliberately, and without authorization removed proprietary or 
sensitive information and materials from his employer or while employed by different 
companies. There is insufficient evidence to conclude any materials he did remove from 
his employers were proprietary or sensitive. There is sufficient evidence to conclude he 
was counseled and received a disciplinary letter from his current employer for 
inappropriate use of the internet by accessing pornography on the job. I find AG ¶ 16(e) 
applies. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant viewed pornography on his company’s computer on three occasions 
during a three-day-period in 2001. He was feeling alienated from his wife after the birth 
of their son. They have since resolved their difficulties. He admitted his behavior. He 
was counseled by his supervisor and the activity has not recurred. It has been ten years 
since the incident. It happened during an emotionally stressful time. Applicant’s conduct 
occurred during a short period of time. I find AG ¶ 17(c) applies. Applicant’s wife and 
employer are aware of the past behavior. He acknowledged the behavior, understands 
the seriousness of his actions, and has not repeated them. I find the behavior is unlikely 
 
9 
 
 
to recur. He was counseled by his employer. Because his wife and employer are aware 
of this past conduct, he is less vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I find 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply.  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
 
After careful consideration of all of the evidence and analysis of the disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶¶ 33 and 39, I conclude there is insufficient reliable evidence to 
conclude any of the disqualifying conditions under these guidelines apply. I will consider 
all of the evidence presented when analyzing the whole person. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K, M, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has been steadily employed since he graduated from college. He has a wife 
and a son. He has been consistently promoted and given increased levels of 
responsibility. In 2001, Applicant had a lapse in judgment when he viewed pornography 
after hours on his work computer. He was counseled and reprimanded, and there has 
not been a recurrence. Applicant admitted when he left employment he packed media 
items that he believed he was authorized to take and did not believe they had any 
proprietary or sensitive information on them. There was insufficient evidence to 
conclude that any of the items he had in his possession contained proprietary or 
sensitive material. I considered the character letters from Applicant’s coworkers who 
cited specific instances where Applicant ensured all his employer’s security procedures 
were followed and his dedicated efforts in practicing security awareness. I find Applicant 
has met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence does not leave me with 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Personal Conduct, Handling 
Protected Information, and Use of Information Technology Systems security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant  
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
