 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06218 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephanie N. Mendez, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on January 19, 2010.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him 
another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on January 19, 
2010.3 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him a third set of interrogatories. He 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated March 24, 2009. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 19, 2010). 
 
3 Government Exhibit 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 19, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
responded to the interrogatories on March 22, 2010.4 On July 7, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 26, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, dated August 6, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on September 20, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on October 4, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on November 15, 
2010, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on December 1, 2010.  
 
During the hearing, eight Government exhibits (GE I, and GE 1-7) and nine 
Applicant exhibits (AE A-I) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
two other witnesses testified. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on December 9, 
2010. The record was kept open until December 15, 2010, to enable Applicant to 
supplement the record. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity and he submitted 
eight additional exhibits, which were admitted into evidence (AE J-Q) without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant partially admitted some of the factual 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., 1.e., and a portion of 
1.f.) of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He 
denied the remaining factual allegations or portions thereof (¶¶ 1.d., a portion of 1.f., 
and 2.a.). 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a principal account manager in business development.5 He is a June 1980 graduate of 
a technical institute with a bachelor’s degree in an unspecified discipline.6 Applicant 
entered active duty with the U.S. Navy in April 1980, and served until he was transferred 
 
 
4 Government Exhibit 7 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 22, 2010). 
 
5 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), supra note 1, at 13; Applicant Exhibit Q (Performance review, dated 
December 16, 2009). 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, at 11. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
to the retired list, effective July 1, 2001.7 Applicant married his first wife in September 
1978, and divorced her in December 1994.8 He married his current wife in December 
1994.9 Applicant has two children, a son, born in October 1996, and a daughter, born in 
November 1998.10  
 
Personal Conduct - Security Clearance 
 
In March 1995, Applicant was granted a Top Secret security clearance.11 At 
some unspecified point thereafter, he was granted access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). Applicant’s security clearance was suspended on April 7, 2000,12 and 
his access to SCI was suspended in May 2000 for violations of Articles 121 (Larceny) 
and 133 (Conduct Unbecoming an Officer), Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ).13 
On January 12, 2001, the command recommended Applicant’s security clearance be 
permanently removed.14 On May 29, 2001, the DON CAF issued Applicant an LOI to 
revoke his security clearance and eligibility for access to SCI.15 The LOI contained a 
provision which stated: “If you choose not to respond or fail to provide a timely 
response, our preliminary decision will IMMEDIATELY become final, based upon review 
of the available information.”16 Applicant contends he was on several months of terminal 
leave when the LOI was issued, and he never received it and was not aware of it.17 
There is a note on the acknowledgement of receipt of the LOI, made by the special 
security officer (SSO) that Applicant had retired, and furnished Applicant’s address and 
 
7 Government Exhibit 6 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated June 
30, 2001), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
8 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 23-24. 
 
9 Id. at 22-23. 
 
10 Id. at 27-28. 
 
11 Government Exhibit 4 (Joint Clearance and Access Verification System (JCAVS) Person Summary, dated 
February 17, 2009), at 1. 
 
12 Government Exhibit 2 (Security Access Eligibility Report (SAER), dated January 12, 2001, at 1, attached 
to Department of the Navy Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF) Letter of Intent to Revoke Security Clearance and 
Eligibility for Access to SCI (LOI), dated May 29, 2001). 
 
13 Government Exhibit 2 (Message from Commander Third Fleet, dated May 10, 2000, cited in LOI). 
Applicant contends that sometime after March 28, 2000, he was informed that he would retain his secret clearance, 
and he was removed from his office space where he had access to SCI and moved to an area where secret was the 
highest level available. He was advised his application for retention of SCI was not going to be processed. See 
Government Exhibit 6 (Applicant’s Answers to the Interrogatories), supra note 3, at 1; Government Exhibit 2 (SAER), 
supra note 12, at 3; Tr. at 41. 
 
14 Government Exhibit 2 (SAER), supra note 12, at 4. 
 
15 Government Exhibit 2 (LOI), supra note 12. 
 
16 Id. at 2. 
 
17 Tr. at 80. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
telephone number.18 There is no evidence that the LOI was ever redirected to Applicant 
or that Applicant ever received the LOI. Applicant was subsequently granted a top 
secret security clearance in August 2005.19 
 
Personal Conduct - Military Performance 
 
 During his military career, Applicant served as a carrier-based F-14 strike-fighter 
pilot, F-14 flight instructor, and air show performer. He flew 49 combat missions in 
support of Operation Desert Storm. Applicant was awarded the Defense Meritorious 
Service Medal, Meritorious Service Medal, Air Medal (with three devices), Navy 
Commendation Medal (with two devices), Navy Achievement Medal (with three 
devices), Joint Unit Commendation, Meritorious Unit Commendation, Navy Battle “E” 
(with three devices), National Defense Service Medal, Southwest Asia Service Medal 
(with three devices), Sea Service Deployment Ribbon (with five devices), Armed Forces 
Expeditionary Medal, Kuwait Liberation Medal (Saudi Arabia), and Kuwait Liberation 
Medal (Kuwait). 
 
  In March 2000, Applicant shoplifted items from a base exchange. Applicant 
attributed his actions to pain medication-induced absentmindedness where he simply 
casually walked out of the exchange, past the check-out stand, without paying for his 
merchandise.20 He was apprehended by a member or members of the security forces 
squadron after a review of a video surveillance tape.21 On May 16, 2000, Applicant 
appeared before an Admiral’s Mast and he was awarded non-judicial punishment (NJP) 
under Article 15, UCMJ. The offenses identified were two violations, each, of Articles 
121 (Larceny) and 133 (Conduct Unbecoming an Officer).22 Applicant was given a 
punitive letter of reprimand, and ordered to forfeit one-half of his pay per month for two 
months, with one-half of the amount suspended for six months.23 Applicant contends 
the Admiral was “old school” and “outraged that [Applicant] would try to ‘hide behind this 
medical defense’ and not take responsibility for the behavior.”24 The decision was 
appealed, unsuccessfully.25 
18 Government Exhibit 2 (LOI), supra note 12, at encl. 2. 
 
19 Government Exhibit 4 (JCAVS), supra note 11, at 2. 
 
20 Applicant Exhibit C (Statement, undated), at 2; Government Exhibit 6 (Applicant’s Answers to the 
Interrogatories), supra note 3, at 2; Tr. at 42. See also Applicant Exhibit K (Doctor’s statement, dated June 29, 2000), 
at 1, wherein the military physician opined that Applicant’s actions were “most likely medication related.” It should be 
noted that, effective July 1, 2001, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) granted Applicant a combined disability 
rating of 60 percent. See Government Exhibit 6 (VA Disability decision, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
the Interrogatories. 
 
21 Government Exhibit 2 (SAER), supra note 12, at 1. There is no copy of the NJP paperwork in the case file. 
 
22 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 6, 2010). 
 
23 Government Exhibit 2 (LOI), supra note 12, at encl. 2; Id. 
 
24 Applicant Exhibit C, supra note 20, at 2. 
 
25 Government Exhibit 7 (Applicant’s Answers to the Interrogatories), supra note 4, at 2; Applicant Exhibit C, 
supra note 20, at 2; Tr. at 47. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
  
 Because all officers are required to have favorable security clearance eligibility, 
and Applicant was no longer eligible, he was administratively processed for retirement 
based on failure to maintain professional standards, and he was placed on the retired 
list, effective July 1, 2001, with unacceptable conduct as the stated reason for 
separation, and ineligible for reenlistment.26 He was a commander at the time of his 
retirement.27 
 
 The command chief of staff noted that Applicant “displayed questionable traits for 
truthfulness in connection with the offenses for which he received NJP. His explanations 
of events surrounding the offenses defied credulity and cast into doubt his integrity in 
certain situations.”28 Former naval aviator colleagues of Applicant are effusive in their 
praise for him. One flight training classmate, a person who has known and flown with 
Applicant since 1980, characterized Applicant using terms including ethical, leader, 
humble, team player, trustworthy, loyal, and committed.29 Another long-time friend, for 
whom Applicant was the flight instructor in 1986, noted that he has trusted Applicant 
with his life, and believes Applicant is trustworthy, loyal, and ethical.30 
 
Personal Conduct – Civilian Performance 
 
 In January 2001, while he was still on terminal leave from the military, Applicant 
commenced working in business development for a government contractor.31 He 
remained with the company until he resigned in March 2008, in lieu of termination for 
inflating expense reports.32 Applicant described his resignation as follows:33 
 
Left job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct. There 
were allegations of a violation of a corporate policy. While there was a 
26 Government Exhibit 6 (DD Form 214), supra note 7. The reentry code “RE-2” appearing in block 27, DD 
Form 214, means “ineligible for reenlistment.” Applicant claimed he was unaware that he was ineligible to reenter. 
See Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 22. 
 
27 Id. 
 
28 Government Exhibit 2 (SAER), supra note 12, at 3. 
 
29 Applicant Exhibit G (Character reference, dated November 9, 2010). 
 
30 Applicant Exhibit E (Character reference, dated November 15, 2010). 
 
31 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 15; Tr. at 48. 
 
32 Government Exhibit 4 (Contractor Adverse Information Report file – Report of Adverse Information, dated 
March 21, 2008). The March 2008 date is identified as the actual date of resignation in lieu of termination, and 
February 12, 2009 is identified as the date the report was submitted to the security office. The February 2009 date 
appears as the date of the incident in Government Exhibit 4 (JCAVS), supra note 11. However, the Confidential 
Separation Agreement and Release of Claims states that Applicant’s employment will end effective March 21, 2008. 
See Applicant Exhibit J (Confidential Separation Agreement and Release of Claims, dated March 20, 2008), at 1. 
Further confusing the issue is a letter from DOHA to the contractor erroneously indicating the Adverse Information 
Report was dated March 21, 2009. See Government Exhibit 4 (Letter from DOHA, dated November 19, 2009). 
 
33 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 17; Applicant Exhibit C, supra note 20, at 3-4. See also, Tr. at 49-
57. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
significant amount of blame to go around and heavy tension related to 
office politics, in the end, I was the one ultimately responsible. Rather than 
spend the time fighting the allegations only to return to the same office 
politics and tension, I elected to retire. 
 
In the Report of Adverse Information, the government contractor’s facility security officer 
stated “[Applicant] was terminated from employment with the Corporation, but it looks as 
though it was allowed to go through as a ‘resignation.’ Very simply, [Applicant] was 
terminated due to inflating expense reports.”34  
 
The government contractor conducted an investigation into Applicant’s 2007 
travel expenses ($26,017) and 2008 travel and related expenses ($13,867).35 An 
internal review disclosed the following:36 
 
Corporate Ethics, Human Resources (HR), and Corporate Business 
Development (CBD) worked with Corporate Legal, Corporate Security, 
and Corporate Finance in the disposition of [Applicant’s] case. . . . (please 
note that we are legally bound by our agreement with [Applicant] to not 
disclose the nature of or facts surrounding [Applicant’s] departure . . . to 
any other than the United States Government). . . . 
 
One former colleague, who has known Applicant for over 20 years, both as a 
naval aviator and as a vice president of the same government contractor, characterized 
Applicant’s supervisors in 2008 as “manipulative, devious, controlling and worried more 
about their own power position than the good of the customers and the corporation. . . . 
It became obvious they were on a vendetta.”37 He also believes Applicant is trustworthy 
and exhibits the highest standards of ethical conduct and moral character.38 Another 
former colleague attributes Applicant’s difficulties with their former government 
contractor to a difference of opinion between Applicant and an off-site superior and 
alienation between two offices of the same company.39 Applicant’s former 
administrative assistant is highly supportive of him. She concurs in the assessment of 
others that Applicant was caught in an environment where Applicant’s superior was a 
small-minded, poor supervisor with a personal agenda and large ego.40 Because of the 
34 Government Exhibit 4 (Contractor Adverse Information Report file – Report of Adverse Information), supra 
note 32. 
 
35 Government Exhibit 4 (Contractor Adverse Information Report file – Internal e-mail, dated February 17, 
2009). 
 
36 Id. There is no direct evidence to indicate what the specific findings of the investigation were, and the only 
documentation offered pertaining to the allegations are the conclusions appearing in the adverse information 
paperwork based upon general allegations. 
 
37 Applicant Exhibit A (Character reference, dated November 8, 2010), at 2. 
 
38 Id. 
 
39 Applicant Exhibit E, supra note 30, at 2. 
 
40 Applicant Exhibit D (Character reference, dated November 18, 2010), at 4. 
 
7 
                                      
 
rmation.  
                                                          
office politics, frustration over the fighting, and stress from Applicant’s superior, she 
chose to relocate to an office in another state, out of his jurisdiction.41 She described 
Applicant as a “documenter” who kept records of everything,42 and contends that she 
and Applicant went over the office budget and each expense report, and “without any 
reservation . . . every expense report . . . was accurate and placed in the proper 
category.” Nevertheless, Applicant’s superior frequently contested every line item and 
“massaged the numbers.”43 She described Applicant as “an honorable, humble and 
ethical man.”44 She added that Applicant is trustworthy, ethical, honest and sincere.45 
Applicant’s former direct manager at his current employer is also highly supportive of 
Applicant’s continued access to classified info 46
 
On July 12, 2000, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from an 
unspecified organization. An incomplete extract of the unsworn and unsigned document 
which appears to be a report of investigation (ROI) states the following regarding the 
140 minute interview: “[Applicant] denied any involvement with Law Enforcement or any 
Criminal Activities since Jun 82 . . . .” 47 Because ten years had passed since the 
identified date, Applicant was unable to indicate if the extract accurately reflected the 
information he purportedly told the investigator.48 
 
On March 24, 2009, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded “no” to 
one question pertaining to his investigations and clearance record. The question 
asked:49 
 
To your knowledge, have you EVER had a clearance or access 
authorization denied, suspended, or revoked; or been debarred from 
government employment? If “Yes,” give the action(s), date(s) of action(s), 
agency(ies), and circumstances. Note: An administrative downgrade or 
termination of a security clearance is not a revocation. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that his access to SCI was 
suspended in about April 2000. Applicant denies he intended to deliberately falsify or 
omit the true facts, and contends he was advised by his security officer to generally only 
 
41 Id. at 2; Tr. at 120. 
 
42 Tr. at 117. 
 
43 Applicant Exhibit D, supra note 40, at 1, 3. 
 
44 Id. at 3. 
 
45 Id. at 4. 
 
46 Applicant Exhibit I (Character reference, dated November 22, 2010). 
 
47 Government Exhibit 7, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
48 Id. at 5, 7. 
 
49 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, § 25.b., at 40. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
go back seven years when answering the questions in the SF 86.50 Applicant 
acknowledged that the security officer did not specifically refer to this particular question 
when discussing how far back Applicant was to go in answering the question.51 In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated:52 
 
I failed to properly qualify the answer regarding security clearance 
processing from 2000 to 2001. [My only awareness was that the SCI 
portion of my clearance was not being renewed (i.e. I was told the update 
process was being discontinued and that all other clearances I held would 
remain in effect).] What I read in [the SOR] goes into a level of detail I am 
not aware of nor would I know how to properly quantify a response. I did 
not knowingly falsify the response. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”53 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”54   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
50 Tr. at 90. 
 
51 Id. at 93. 
 
52 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 22. 
 
53 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
54 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”55 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.56  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”57 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”58 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
55 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
56 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
57 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
58 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(e), “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . . ,” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant’s omissions, concealments, and falsifications of 
critical information pertaining to his criminal conduct while on active duty, his NJP, and 
the loss of his security clearance and access to SCI, provides sufficient evidence to 
examine if his omissions were deliberate falsifications or were the result of simple 
oversight or negligence on his part.59  
 
As to AG ¶ 16(a), the sole focus of that potentially disqualifying condition is the 
incident regarding the response to the question on the SF 86 pertaining to the denial, 
suspension, or revocation of a security clearance or access authorization (SOR ¶ 2.a.). 
As noted above, Applicant’s security clearance was suspended on April 7, 2000, and his 
access to SCI was suspended in May 2000. Those are facts known to the command 
and those involved in processing security clearance eligibility, as set forth in documents, 
but there is no evidence to show that Applicant was given written or oral notice of the 
actions, or that he was ever made aware of them. There is no evidence that Applicant 
was ever debriefed when he lost his security clearance or SCI. To the contrary, 
Applicant contends that sometime after March 28, 2000, he was informed that he would 
59 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)).  
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
retain his secret clearance, and he was removed from his office space where he had 
access to SCI, pending the investigation, and moved to an area where secret was the 
highest level available. His application for SCI retention was not being processed. 
Moreover, Applicant denied intending to deliberately omit, conceal, or falsify the true 
facts. While Applicant’s answer to the question may be incorrect, there is no evidence to 
support a conclusion that it was a deliberate falsification on his part. AG ¶ 16(a) has not 
been established. 
 
As to AG ¶ 16(b), the sole focus of that potentially disqualifying condition is the 
incident regarding the responses to the question(s) purportedly asked by the 
investigator in July 2000, pertaining to possible involvement with law enforcement or 
any criminal activities since 1982 (SOR ¶ 1.c.). As noted above, Applicant was 
apprehended by a member or members of the security forces squadron after a review of 
a military exchange video surveillance tape. In May 2000, Applicant appeared before an 
Admiral’s Mast and he was awarded NJP under Article 15, UCMJ. The offenses 
identified were two violations, each, of Articles 121 (Larceny) and 133 (Conduct 
Unbecoming an Officer). This incident would not have been reportable in the SF 86 
because there is no evidence that Applicant was ever “charged” with any felony offense 
under the UCMJ. The evidence as to what Applicant may or may not have said during 
the purported interview calls for speculation because of the nature of the “evidence.” An 
incomplete extract of an unsworn and unsigned document which appears to be part of a 
ROI states that Applicant “denied any involvement with Law Enforcement or any 
Criminal Activities since Jun 82 . . . .” Because ten years had passed since the identified 
date, Applicant was unable to indicate if the extract accurately reflected the information 
he is alleged to have given at that time.  
 
Furthermore, there is substantial concern that the document submitted by the 
Government should be barred by § E3.1.20., of the Directive, which states: “An ROI 
may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible 
under the Federal Rules of Evidence. . . .” In this instance, the document was not 
recognized by the Applicant; the document did not appear to be a complete document; 
the document was not signed by either the drafter of the document or by Applicant; and 
the document was not received with an authenticating witness. Likewise, it is unclear if 
the words appearing on the document are those of Applicant, or a general conclusion of 
the drafter. In addition, it appears that the requisite preliminary circumstances, as set 
forth in § E3.1.22., of the Directive have not been met.60 Under these circumstances, 
60 A written or oral statement adverse to the applicant on a controverted issue may be received and 
considered by the Administrative Judge without affording an opportunity to cross-examine the 
person making the statement orally, or in writing when justified by the circumstances, only in either 
of the following circumstances: 
 
E3.1.22.1. If the head of the Department or Agency supplying the statement certifies that the 
person who furnished the information is a confidential informant who has been engaged in 
obtaining intelligence information for the Government and that disclosure of his or her identity 
would be substantially harmful to the national interest; or 
 
E3.1.22.2. If the GC, DOD, has determined the statement concerned appears to be relevant, 
material, and reliable; failure to receive and consider the statement would be substantially harmful 
to the national security; and the person who furnished the information cannot appear to testify due 
to the following: 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
although the document was admitted into evidence, I cannot give substantial weight to 
its contents. AG ¶ 16(b) has not been established. 
 
Applicant’s actions while in the military exchange and his subsequent NJP, the 
loss of his security clearance and access to SCI, his forced retirement from active duty 
with the associated ineligibility to reenter the service, and his resignation from his former 
employer, are activities which, if known, may affect Applicant’s personal, professional, 
or community standing, and raise security concerns. AG ¶ 16(e) has been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) 
may apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” Similarly, if “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability,” AG ¶ 17(g) may apply. 
 
Appellant’s pain medication-induced absentmindedness and actions while in the 
military exchange occurred in March 2000, over a decade ago. Applicant did something 
for which he has shown remorse. While the extenuating circumstances were rejected by 
the Admiral during the NJP, they have been supported by his physician, a Navy doctor. 
His medical condition was subsequently recognized and controlled more effectively. 
While the offense was not really minor in nature, the command chose to handle it 
administratively as an NJP, not as a military court-martial. There is substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s outstanding reputation and previous gallant service to our Nation. In light 
of the length of the period since his action, there is little doubt as to Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Moreover, with his controlled medication, 
such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
There is substantial controversy related to the incident pertaining to Applicant’s 
resignation from his former employer. On one side there is a Report of Adverse 
Information wherein the government contractor’s facility security officer stated 
“[Applicant] was terminated from employment with the Corporation, but it looks as 
though it was allowed to go through as a ‘resignation.’ Very simply, [Applicant] was 
terminated due to inflating expense reports.” That statement appears to be a simplified 
conclusion which is not supported by the record. The government contractor conducted 
an investigation into Applicant’s 2007 travel expenses and 2008 travel and related 
expenses, but there is no explanation as to what the investigation may have found and 
there are no expressed conclusions. Instead, there is a general comment that several 
 
 
E3.1.22.2.1. Death, severe illness, or similar cause, in which case the identity of the person and the 
information to be considered shall be made available to the applicant; or 
 
E3.1.22.2.2. Some other cause determined by the Secretary of Defense, or when appropriate by 
the Department or Agency head, to be good and sufficient. 
 
13 
                                      
 
divisions coordinated in the disposition of Applicant’s case, and the government 
contractor noted that it was legally bound by an agreement with Applicant to not 
disclose the nature of or facts surrounding Applicant’s departure to any entity other than 
the U.S. Government. In this regard, Applicant raised a significant point. If the 
government contractor was required to report the information, why did it delay doing so 
until February 2009, nearly 11 months after the resignation? The answer has not been 
furnished. 
 
On the other side there is the undisputed allegation by Applicant, supported by 
several former coworkers in a position to know the situation, that Applicant was caught 
in an environment of office politics with a new off-site superior who was described as 
“manipulative, devious, controlling and worried more about their own power position 
than the good of the customers and the corporation. . . . It became obvious they were 
on a vendetta.” Several character references, including those who knew Applicant 
before, during, and after the alleged incident, concur in an assessment that Applicant is 
trustworthy and exhibits the highest standards of ethical conduct and moral character. 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(g) all apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is substantial evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant 
shoplifted, was apprehended, and disciplined under NJP. As a result, he lost his security 
clearance and access to SCI, was forced to retire from active duty, and he subsequently 
resigned from his former employer, amid allegations of inflating expense reports.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is also substantial. Until 
his March 2000 pain medication-induced absentmindedness and actions while in the 
military exchange, Applicant had an outstanding reputation and previous gallant service 
to our Nation. The command chose to handle Applicant’s conduct administratively as an 
 
14 
                                      
 
                                                          
NJP, not as a military court-martial. While the extenuating circumstances for his actions 
were rejected during the NJP, they have been supported by his physician, a Navy 
doctor. Applicant’s medical condition was subsequently recognized and controlled more 
effectively. Witnesses all concur that Applicant was and is trustworthy, ethical, honest 
and sincere, and has good judgment.  
 
I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.61 Applicant’s 
2000 incident in the military exchange, and the subsequent negative actions which 
occurred as a direct result of his actions, all occurred over a decade ago, and have not 
recurred. He displayed remorse and reasonable explanations for his action, and his 
subsequent actions and activities are sufficient to mitigate continuing security concerns. 
See AG && 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
61 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
