KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Whether or not a debt is collectable is not the focus of a security clearance
adjudication.  Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-07916.a1
DATE: 05/09/2011
DATE: May 9, 2011
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07916
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Robert W. Wilson, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 17, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 17, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
the evidence raised Guideline F security concerns; whether the Judge erred in his application of the
1Applicant Exhibit C includes a copy of the Form 656, Offer in Compromise, dated July 20, 2009.  In Section
III of this form, Applicant checked two blocks.  One asserted “I have insufficient assets and income to pay the full
amount.”  The other asserted “I owe this amount and have sufficient assets to pay the full amount, but due to my
exceptional circumstances, requiring full payment would cause an economic hardship or would be unfair and
inequitable.”  Section VII asserted that Applicant “will borrow the funds from friends” to pay his offered $20,000
settlement.  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(a): “the behavior happened so long ago . . . and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(d): “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts[.]”  
5Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
mitigating conditions; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm the decision of the Judge.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is president and CEO of
a company employing between five and seven people.  
Applicant’s SOR lists three delinquent debts to the Internal Revenue Service.  Applicant
owes the IRS approximately $120,000 in back taxes, interest, and penalties.  In 2000, Applicant
started his own business.  He loaned the business $80,000 as startup money.  This money was
withdrawn from his 401(k) account.  Applicant attributed much of the tax debt to his accountant’s
having designated the funds as a withdrawal, and therefore taxable, rather than as a loan to his
business.  
Applicant made monthly payments to the IRS.  In addition, the IRS started monthly
garnishments of Applicant’s Social Security payments.  Applicant has employed accountants and
an attorney to work on his tax debts.  He has submitted an offer in compromise to the IRS, offering
to pay $20,000 in full satisfaction of his debts.  In the offer he stated that he would borrow the
money from friends to make his payments.1  Although Applicant’s accountant expects resolution of
the issue in late 2010, there is no further information on this matter contained in the record.  
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s tax debts were
not remote in time, since they were ongoing, and, in any event, they cast doubt on Applicant’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.2  He further concluded that the debts did not result
from circumstances outside Applicant’s control3 and that the IRS garnishment action did not
constitute a good-faith effort by Applicant to pay his debt.4  Moreover, Applicant had not received
financial counseling.5  Considering the evidence as a whole, the Judge concluded that Applicant had
failed to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation. 
Applicant asserts that the Internal Revenue Service has failed to be responsive to Applicant’s
offers to compromise.  He cites the testimony of an accountant.  However, the accountant testified
that Applicant had no incentive to push the IRS because the debts were “going away.”  Tr. at 49.
It is well-established that whether or not a debt is collectable is not the focus of a security clearance
adjudication.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-16841 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008).   
Viewed in the context of the record as a whole, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s
ongoing tax debts raised Guideline F security concerns is sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-
05434 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2009).  The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined
the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and
the whole-person factors.  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto.
Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
