1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-08199
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows she has a
history of financial problems (i.e., delinquent debts). Those difficulties resulted from a
troubled marriage in which her husband controlled all financial matters to her detriment.
She separated from her husband and obtained a divorce in 2009. She initiated a good-
faith effort to repay, settle, or otherwise resolve her debts. She credibly disputed certain
debts, and she is now living within her means. Applicant presented sufficient evidence
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her history
of financial problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided for
Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  in about August1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations.   
Applicant answered the SOR in August 2010, and did not request a hearing.
Subsequently, in December 2010, she changed her mind and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me January 26, 2011. The hearing took place February 23, 2011.
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received March 3, 2011. 
At the close of evidence, I kept the record open until March 16, 2011, to allow
Applicant to present documentary evidence in addition to Exhibits A and B. Her post-
hearing documents are marked and admitted, without objections, as follows: (1) Exhibit
C–2009 divorce decree; (2) Exhibit D–2009 performance report; (3) Exhibit E–2010
performance report; (4) Exhibit F–account activity report for judgment; and (5) Exhibit
G–student loan payoff.    
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s responses to the SOR allegations were mixed with admissions and
denials as well as explanations. Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for the first time. She has worked as a supply chain
specialist for her current employer since January 2008. Before that, she worked from
July 2006 to January 2008 as a subcontractor for her current employer. According to
recent performance reports, she has a good employment record and is known as a
valued team member. She is seeking to advance her career by obtaining a bachelor’s
degree in business administration. For this endeavor, her school expenses are
reimbursed by her employer.   
Applicant has a history of financial problems. Those difficulties resulted from a
troubled marriage, which began in 1999. She described her marriage as an unhealthy,
nonphysical, abusive relationship in which her husband controlled financial matters and
 Exhibit C. 2
 Exhibit 4 at 6. 3
 Exhibits A and F. 4
3
excluded her from all participation in and knowledge of their financial affairs. For
example, he withheld a debit card from her and she did not have access to their bank
account unless she walked into a branch office and made inquiry. She separated from
her husband in 2008, and she obtained a divorce in 2009. The marriage produced no
children. The divorce decree  addressed payment of debts by Applicant and her2
husband as follows:
• Applicant was ordered to pay all debts unknown to her husband;
• Each party was ordered to pay the debts each incurred since August 1, 2009, the
date of their last separation;
• Each party was ordered to pay any unsecured debt incurred in their name alone; 
• Each party was ordered to pay any debt incurred by them after August 1, 2009;
• Any debt incurred by either party before August 1, 2009, was ordered to be paid
by the party who incurred the debt; and 
• Each party was ordered to pay 100% of their student loans.  
The divorce decree, as summarized above, did not address, by name, any of the debts
in the SOR, which alleged five delinquent debts for a total of about $22,776. Those five
debts are addressed below.
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a concerns an unpaid judgment for $9,284. It stems from an
automobile loan, a joint installment loan, obtained by Applicant and her husband in
2006.   The vehicle was repossessed in 2007, when Applicant was out of work for about3
six months. She did not consider the loan her obligation because her husband bought
the vehicle and put her on the financial paperwork. She was unaware of the judgment
for a deficiency balance until she learned about it during the security clearance process.
In 2010, she communicated with the law firm collecting the judgment and agreed to
make payments via payroll deduction/garnishment. She has made payments of about
$324 per month (the amount varies based on her pay) since about August 2010; the
outstanding balance in August 2010 was $14,237, which included a large amount of
interest; and the current balance as of March 2011 was $7,823.  The law firm has been4
unable to locate Applicant’s ex-husband, so she alone is repaying the judgment.
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b concerns a charged-off account for $5,140. It stems from
a credit card account with a major bank Applicant’s husband opened before their
marriage in 1999. Although her husband put her name on the account at some point,
she denies responsibility for it because she never possessed a credit card for the
account and did not have access to the account. The debt does appear on a January
 Exhibit 7 at 2. 5
 Exhibit 4 at 5. 6
 Exhibit 7 at 2. 7
 Exhibit B. 8
 Exhibits 4–7. 9
4
2011 credit report with a balance of $5,140.  She did not present any paperwork specific5
to this debt. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a charged-off account for $8,230. It stems from an
automobile loan, a joint installment loan, opened in 2006.  Applicant kept possession of6
the car after the divorce. The car experienced mechanical problems that she could not
afford to repair. The vehicle was repossessed in about June 2009. She has not
received correspondence or notice from the creditor that she owed a deficiency balance
on the loan. The debt does appear on a January 2011 credit report with a balance of
$8,988.  She did not present any paperwork specific to this debt, but she did present7
proof of payment on another automobile loan with the same creditor.  This is the loan,8
cosigned by her mother, she used to buy her current vehicle to replace the vehicle
repossessed in 2009. The paperwork works shows timely monthly payments from
December 2009 through November 2010, and she testified the payments remain
current. 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are medical collection accounts for $49 and
$73. Although account numbers are alleged, the creditors are not. Likewise, the identity
and addresses of the creditors are not revealed in the credit reports.  Applicant denies9
both knowledge and responsibility for these debts. 
Applicant has taken other steps to rehabilitate her financial life. She has lived
with her mother since 2008 and pays her about $400 monthly. Besides cosigning for the
car loan, her mother also made the $3,000 down payment for the car, which Applicant
has since repaid. Applicant’s gross income from her job is about $44,000; she
contributes 8% into a 401(k) account; she has about $650 in a savings account; and
she manages her money by using online banking,  reviewing her account on a day-to-
day basis and planning accordingly.  
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to10
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 18
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).19
5
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As10
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt11
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An12
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  13
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting14
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An15
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate16
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme17
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.20
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 21
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an22
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  23
 AG ¶ 19(a).  24
 AG ¶ 19(c). 25
6
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it20
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant21
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline22
F is:
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  23
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems (i.e., delinquent debts). This history raises security concerns because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting24
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to25
establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
With that said, I attach no security significance to the two medical collection
accounts for $49 and $73. First, in general, unpaid medical debts rarely reflect poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, and they
rarely reflect frivolous spending, overspending, or living beyond one’s means. Instead,
they reflect an expense, often unexpected, for necessary medical care or treatment.
 AG ¶ 20 (a)–(f). 26
7
Second, the amounts involved here are small if not trivial. Third, in light of Applicant’s
denial, the evidence is not sufficient to establish that she is responsible for these two
debts with unknown creditors. For all these reasons, the two medical collection
accounts are decided for Applicant.  
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Any of the26
following may mitigate security concerns:  
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent are ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e). Each is
discussed below. 
Mitigating condition ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant’s financial problems
resulted from a troubled marriage in which her husband controlled all financial matters
to her detriment. This situation, circumstance, or condition was largely beyond her
control. She has acted responsibly under the circumstances by separating from and
then divorcing her husband. She has since gone about the process of rebuilding her life,
to include her financial life. 
Mitigating condition ¶ 20(d) applies because Applicant has taken steps to repay
debts and stabilize her financial situation. Besides paying all of her current expenses,
 Exhibit B. 27
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).28
8
repaying her mother a $3,000 loan for a car down payment, and paying on her current
car loan, Applicant entered into an agreement to repay the judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a). She
is repaying the judgment by payroll deduction/garnishment, which is an arrangement
that is not unusual when a law firm is collecting on a judgment, as is the case here. She
has made multiple payments, she is making good progress, and she will have the
judgment repaid in the near future.
Mitigating condition ¶ 20(e) applies because Applicant has provided a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The debt
in SOR ¶ 1.b is the charged-off account stemming from a credit card account opened by
her ex-husband before their marriage. She provided a credible explanation that she
never had access to this account and therefore contends she is not responsible for the
debt. Her position is supported by the terms of the divorce decree, as she did not incur
any of the charges to the credit card account. She did not provide any documented
proof specific to the debt, but that is somewhat understandable given her lack of
account access.  
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is the charged-off account stemming from a car loan for
the vehicle Applicant kept after the divorce. The vehicle was voluntarily repossessed
when Applicant decided she could not afford mechanical repairs. She never received
notice of a deficiency balance from the creditor. Subsequently, she financed, with her
mother as a cosigner, her current vehicle from the same creditor. She did not present
any paperwork specific to the debt, but she presented paperwork for her current vehicle
with the same creditor.  This ongoing debtor-creditor relationship suggests that the27
creditor is not pursuing a deficiency balance or that a deficiency balance does not exist.
 
To conclude, I have no current doubts about Applicant’s  judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. Although Applicant did not present a perfect case in mitigation, she
presented sufficient evidence, with her credible testimony and documentary evidence,
that her financial problems were largely due to her troubled marriage as opposed to her
financial irresponsibility or negligence. The evidence also shows that since leaving her
husband, she has made progress in resolving financial problems from her past, she is
living within her means, and she is working hard to improve her financial future.
Accordingly, afer giving due consideration to the whole-person concept,  I conclude28
that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
9
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.           
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
