                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.   09-03922          
                                                               )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David Price, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On August 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 7, 2010, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 8, 2010, and was scheduled for
hearing on December 14, 2010. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on one
witness (herself) and seven exhibits (AEs A-G). The transcript (Tr.) was received on
December 28, 2010.
Procedural Rulings
      
Before the close of the hearing, Appellant requested leave to supplement the
record with documented resolution of her disputed debts. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was
afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the
record with letters disputing certain of her listed debts and removal from her credit
reports of other reported debts. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AE E-1.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated (a) a state tax lien of $756
and (b) 24 debts exceeding $23,000. Applicant denied all of the listed debts.  She
disputed all of the reported debts following her layoff in 2001. 
                    
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old web developer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant’s parents are Holocaust survivors. (Tr. 27) Most of her family was
exterminated in WW II. (Tr. 27-28) Her mother was an accomplished fiber artist and
teacher at a local university. (Tr. 28) Her father was a Navy veteran who worked in the
public health field. (Tr. 30-31) He practiced orthodontics after completing his public
health tenure of duty. (Tr. 31) Her father was very secretive about his personal affairs
and “turned up murdered ” in another state. (GE 1; Tr.32-33) His experiences affected
her entire family. (Tr. 34) Applicant left home at the age of 16 to attend college. (Tr. 34)  
Applicant attended respected universities between September 1979 and
September 1986. (GE 1 and AE B; Tr. 32-35) She earned no degrees from either of
these universities. She attended an accredited art institute between September 1987
and September 1988 and earned a bachelor’s degree. (GE 1) Applicant has never been
married and has no children.  She has no military experience.
Between January 1990 and January 2001, Applicant worked for an engineering
consulting firm as a multimedia developer. (GE 1; Tr. 36) She was unemployed for a
3
period in 2001 and worked as a self-employed multimedia developer and consultant for
about five years. (GE 1; Tr. 42-43) She was employed by a communications firm
between January 2005 and January 2006 as a multimedia developer. Between January
2006 and February 2009 she worked as a web developer for several different firms and
has been employed by her current employer since February 2009. (GE 1) 
Applicant’s Finances
Before her lay-off in 2001, Applicant earned substantial money and enjoyed good
credit. (Tr. 38-41) Following her lay-off, she sold the home she had built (costing her
around $200,000) for around $400,000. (Tr. 38-39) Two years later, she financed the
construction of another home with a construction loan. At this time, she still enjoyed
good credit. (Tr. 55) For the ensuing several years, she relied on independent
consulting assignments to pay her bills.  With annual income of only $40,000 between
2004 and 2005, she could not make her mortgage payments and lost her home to
foreclosure in 2006. (Tr. 47-49)  For the ensuing three years, she earned a modest
income and managed to pay her bills while living within her means. She continues to
live very frugally. (Tr. 69-70)
In July 2009, Applicant was asked to complete interrogatories for the
Government in connection with her application for a security clearance. (GE 3) Upon
reviewing her credit report (Tr. 55-57), Applicant wrote to listed creditors reporting debit
balances and the credit reporting agencies listing these debts in July and September
2009,  claiming she had no knowledge of the accounts. (GE 3 and AEs C, E, and E-1;
Tr. 57-58)  
Several of the listed creditors, whose claims were not time-barred, responded to
her letter inquiries and advised they would be seeking the deletion of the accounts in
question (i.e., creditors 1.i ($777), 1.r ($1,149), and 1.s ($500). See AEs C, E, E-1, and
G. One of the creditors acknowledged her dispute, creditor 1.d ($3,036). See GE. 3.
Others never responded to her formal disputes: creditors 1.a (a $756 state tax lien);1.c
($141);1.e ($85); 1.f ($137);1.g (a deficiency claim of $10,808 on a returned leased
vehicle); 1.h ($2,754);1.j ($435);1.k ($544); 1.l ($42); 1.m ($40);1.n ($527); 1.o (a
$2,142 lease claim); 1.q ($441); 1.u ($50); 1.v ($353);1.w ($301); and 1.x ($780).  See
GE 3 and AEs C, E, E-1, and G. Two listed debts are manifestly duplications of a single
$141 claim (creditors 1.c and 1.t).  See GEs 2 and 4 and AEs C, F, and G.
Besides writing direct letters to a number of the listed creditors cited in her credit
reports, Applicant wrote letters in August and September 2009 to the main credit
reporting agencies. (AEs C, E, and E-1; Tr. 50-51, 81-82, 87)  In these letters, Applicant
recited key statutory provisions covering false reporting of claimed outstanding debts,
and disputed the following listed creditors in her credit report and the SOR: creditor 1.c
($141); creditor 1.d ($3,036), creditor 1.e ($85), creditor 1.f ($137); creditor 1.g
($10,808); creditor 1.h ($2,754); creditor 1.i ($777), creditor 1.j ($435); creditor 1.k
($544), creditor 1.l ($42); creditor 1.n ($527); creditor 1.o ($2,142); creditor 1.p ($82);
1.q ($441); creditor 1.r ($1,149); creditor 1.s ($500); creditor 1.t ($141); creditor 1.u
4
($50); creditor 1.v ($353); creditor 1.w ($301); and creditor 1.x ($780).  See GE 3 and
AEs C and F.  
Several years previous (in 2005), Applicant wrote to her mortgage company
seeking hardship relief from  her late mortgage payments. (GE3)  She cited the lack of
full-time employment as the principal contributing factor causing her to default on her
mortgage payments. She asked to work with the mortgage company to avoid
foreclosure of her home. (GE 3).  Applicant was unable to arrange modified financing
from the lender and avert foreclosure of her home.  She wrote to the mortgagee again in
July 2009 when she found a $42,790 debt still listed in her credit report. While she
received no response to her letters, the claimed debt does not appear in any of her
recent credit reports and is not covered in the SOR. 
In none of her dispute letters admitted at hearing and in her post-hearing
submissions did Applicant provide any documentary proof to corroborate her disputes of
the debts alleged to be owing in the SOR. The law firm she engaged to track down and
identify any legitimate debts helped her to identify creditors with valid debts, but could
not substantiate any of the debts listed in her credit reports and SOR. (AE C; Tr. 59-60,
73-74, 83-90) But neither could the Government provide any investigative inquiries of
identified individual creditors and their representatives. Assessments must necessarily
be made on the strength of the credit reports, Applicant’s inquiries of the individual
creditors listed in her credit reports, Applicant’s answers to the Government’s
interrogatories, the SOR, and Applicant’s hearing testimony. 
Applicant currently nets close to $3,500 a month. (AE C) She reports monthly
expenses of $2,525 and a net monthly remainder of $975. (AE C) Her most recent
credit reports reveal that Applicant is current with all of her undisputed debts.  (GEs 2
and 4) She currently rents a home and drives a 1998 Honda Accord. (Tr. 68-69)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by her supervisor, coworkers, and friends as a reliable
and trustworthy web developer and colleague and friend. (AE A). Her landlord of over a
year described her as a very caring tenant who was always available to assist and
make repairs to the home as needed. (AE A) 
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
5
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
6
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is
clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary
proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a well regarded web developer for a defense contractor whose credit
reports list a number of collection and charged-off delinquent accounts dating to 2006.
Many of the listed accounts are small in amount.  Some are larger, and one (the largest)
represents a deficiency claim on a returned lease vehicle and exceeds $10,000. 
Applicant disputes each of the debts listed in the SOR and her credit reports.  In
all but one of the disputed debts, she claims a lack of any familiarity with the creditor and
the charges. She acknowledged only the creditor covered by subparagraph 1.g as a
creditor she dealt with.  But she never received any paperwork from this creditor detailing
the basis of any deficiency claim by this creditor and its collection agency, despite
repeated inquiries.  While several of the listed creditors have since removed their debt
claims from Applicant’s credit reports, most never responded to either her inquiries or
those of the law firm she employed to assist her. Nor does she appear to have received
any assistance from the credit reporting agencies who received her inquiries. The credit
reports reveal one debt (creditor 1.t) that is a duplication of the listed creditor 1.c debt.   
       Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
where the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
7
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of presumptively valid delinquent debts (based
on produced credit reports) and her past inability to resolve these debts by the disputes
process available to her warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC)
of the Guidelines¶ DC 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s listed debts are uniformly disputed.  She denies any familiarity with any
of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR and credit reports and denies incurring any
debts at any time with any of the listed creditors, with one exception. But while she admits
to leasing a vehicle from creditor 1.g , she denies ever being noticed with any sale or
deficiency. Her efforts to elicit substantive information from the creditor’s collection agent
were not successful.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
As a general rule, credit reports meet the substantial evidence standard and the
Government’s prima facie obligations under E3.1.14 of the Directive for establishing its
requisite proof requirements. See ISCR Case No. 08-1184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan 7, 2010).
Applicant’s listed debts are well reported in Applicant’s 2009 and 2010 credit reports.  But
Applicant denies any familiarity with any of the listed debts and any legal responsibility for
them. She backs her claims with letters of inquiry she wrote in July and August 2009 to
each of the creditors and credit reporting agencies. She pulled her credit report upon
receiving the Government’s interrogatories and was surprised to find the listed debts in
her report.  Only three of the companies she inquired of responded to her letters, and
these creditors (creditors 1.i, 1.r, and 1.s) deleted the debts from their own accounts and
committed to having them removed from Applicant’s credit reports. 
In recognition of the considerable good-faith efforts Applicant made to identify
creditors with valid outstanding debts, mitigation credit is available to her. All of her debts
reflect documented, good-faith disputes. Applicant has mounted major communication
initiatives with all of her creditors, and either has earned the removal of certain disputed
debts or has never heard anything back from the individual creditors and the credit
reporting agencies. 
Applicant’s good-faith efforts to resolve her debts merit the application of two of the
mitigating conditions for financial considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,”
and ¶ MC 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
8
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”
                                                
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding her debt
disputes, her steady income and good credit for most of her professional career, and the
absence of any countervailing evidence outside of the credit reports themselves to
discredit her disputes of the debts in issue all favor Applicant in her efforts to demonstrate
her overall good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant’s proofs provide
credible indicators of  her ability to be trusted in times of stress and enable her to meet
her own evidentiary burden of disproving the alleged debts.
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is substantial that Applicant has
mounted good-faith efforts to resolve her debts. Since her return to full time employment
in 2009, she has paid her current debts in a timely way and managed her finances
responsibly.  She is at low risk to any enforcement action by any of the named creditors in
the SOR.  And should any of the listed creditors with disputed claims seek to validate their
claims, Applicant has ample resources available to resolve them.  
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s listed delinquent debts and the good-faith efforts she has mounted to seek
merited explanations of the debts listed in the SOR and credit reports, Applicant
successfully mitigates judgment, reliability and trustworthiness concerns related to her
debts. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the
financial considerations guideline. 
        
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.x: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
9
