 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-05673 
                       ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on April 9, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 On December 9, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
Applicant signed a notarized Answer to the SOR on December 29, 2010, in which he 
admitted the allegations. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 11, 2011, and the 
case was assigned to me on January 25, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
February 9, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 2, 2011. I 
admitted two Government Exhibits, (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified, and offered 13 
exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to India, set forth in fifteen U.S. 
government documents submitted by Department Counsel. (Hearing Exhibit I). The 
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and not 
subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 40 years old, was born in India. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering there in 1993. He worked for software companies in India, including a 
subsidiary of a U.S. corporation. He did not serve in the Indian military. He married an 
Indian citizen in 1998. He and his wife worked for private companies in India. He came 
to the United States in 1997, at the age of 27, and his wife came to the United States in 
1998. Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2008.3 His children, 
who are two and seven years of age, are native-born U.S. citizens. His life revolves 
around his daughter’s school and sports activities, and his church activities. He is 
currently working toward his master’s degree in project management. He is a project 
manager for a defense contractor, where he has been employed since 2006. Applicant 
has held a public trust position since 2006. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (GE 1, 2; AE A; Tr. 22-23, 54, 66-74)  
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 When Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens in 2008, they forwarded their foreign passports to 
the Indian embassy, where they were cancelled. Guideline C is not alleged. (Tr. 77, 108) 
 
 
3
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father, 77 years old, is 
retired. His mother is 67 years old. They visited Applicant twice in the United States in 
the past 13 years. They are in touch by telephone every week or two. Applicant 
provides his parents with approximately $375 per month support. He visited his family in 
India six times between 2002 and 2010. When he visits, he stays about three weeks. 
(GE 2; AE A; Tr. 91-97, 106-111) 
 
Applicant also has two sisters who are citizens and residents of India. One sister, 
who is 44, is an excise inspector for the Indian government, which Applicant describes 
as a “low-level” position involving ensuring taxes are paid on time. Her spouse is a 
chemical engineer for a private company. Applicant's other sister is 45 years old. She 
works for a private bank, and her husband has his own IT company. Applicant talks with 
his sisters once every week or two by telephone. They have not visited him in the 
United States, and have never requested help or support from him. Applicant's family in 
India is not aware that he is seeking a security clearance. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 91-97) 
 
Applicant's mother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of India. His 
mother-in-law, 66, is retired from a position working in a pharmacy. She has no interest 
or understanding of Applicant's job. His sister-in-law has a clerical position in an airline 
company, and his brother-in-law works for an insurance company. Applicant's mother-
in-law visited Applicant and his wife in the United States twice, and his sister-in-law 
visited them once. He talks with his in-laws once every week or two by telephone. 
Applicant's in-laws have no connections with the Indian government. (GE 1, 2; AE A; Tr. 
98-102) 
 
Applicant purchased a townhouse in India while he was an Indian citizen, worth 
approximately $100,000. He stays there when he visits, and keeps it vacant when he is 
not there. He is trying to sell the property, and placed it on the market in June 2010. 
However, water damage developed and it had to be withdrawn. Applicant has since 
repaired the damage, and it is has been back on the market since December 2010. 
Applicant also maintains a bank account in order to pay expenses related to the house, 
and to provide some support to his parents. It has a balance of approximately $2,250. 
When the house is sold, he will close the account. He has no other Indian investments, 
business interests, or connections. Applicant’s home in the United States was assessed 
in March 2011 at $743,000. He has bank accounts and stocks worth approximately 
$120,000. (GE 2; AE A, C; Tr. 55, 102-107, 112, 115-118) 
 
 Applicant received the Team Appreciation Award for outstanding technical client 
support in 2004. The Contracting Officers Technical Representative (COTR) on 
Applicant's contract with a federal agency submitted a character reference. He has 
known Applicant since 2006 and has worked closely with him since that time. He noted 
that Applicant consistently maintains a professional attitude, and has an excellent 
rapport with his superiors. In the four years Applicant has held a public trust position, 
he has never had negative work or character issues. He considers Applicant a strong 
asset to the agency. The Director of IT solutions at Applicant's company also submitted 
 
 
4
                                                
a reference. Applicant leads a 39-person IT team, and is the subject matter expert, and 
the primary liaison with the client. Applicant has earned the respect of his subordinates, 
the management team, and the client, and has consistently performed with the highest 
integrity. (AE D, E) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.4 India is a sovereign, socialist, 
secular democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a 
bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Since gaining 
independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, particularly with regard to 
its relations with Pakistan. Within India, sporadic outbreaks of religious riots and violent 
attacks by a variety of separatists and terrorist groups have occurred.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability has 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which 
human rights violations went unpunished.  
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, 
of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment 
which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Governmental 
and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key 
to its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two 
countries are the world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom 
protected by representative government, and share common interests in the free flow 
of commerce, fighting terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia.  
 
India and the United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. 
India has demonstrated its commitment to political freedom. It is seeking a permanent 
seat on the United Nations Security Council. The United States and India issued a joint 
statement of their intentions to foster bilateral relations by establishing working groups 
to address strategic cooperation, energy and climate change, education, economics, 
trade, agriculture, science, technology, health, and innovation. 
 
 
 
 
4 The facts cited derive from the summary and documents contained in Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
 
 
5
                                                
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has close ties to his parents, sisters, and in-laws, who are citizen-
residents of India. He is in touch with them about weekly. He visited India six times 
between 2002 and 2010. Some family members have visited him in the United States 
as well. Applicant's ties support a conclusion that a heightened risk of foreign influence 
exists. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
 
 
7
                                                
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.9 Here, Applicant's 
parents, sisters, and in-laws live in India. Applicant has frequent contact with them. He 
also sends money to help support his parents, and travels to see them every year or 
two. His conduct indicates his affection and sense of obligation to them. Applicant's 
sister holds a job with the Indian government. However, she—and other members of 
his family—have never requested help from Applicant, and none of his family is aware 
that he is seeking a security clearance. Moreover, the United States and India have a 
long-standing, stable relationship, and share common strategic goals. India is a 
democracy and a partner in combating terrorism. Given the nature of the country 
involved, it is unlikely that the government would exploit him or his relatives based on 
their relationship. Finally, Applicant has strong ties to the United States: his wife and 
children are U.S. citizens; he owns a home here, has substantial savings and 
investments in the United States, and is deeply involved in his daughter’s school and 
sports activities, and his local church. I conclude Applicant would choose these long-
standing relationships over his ties to India. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
8
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for 
exploitation. Here, Applicant has close ties with foreign family members that raise such 
concerns. However, they do not outweigh his ties to the United States. Applicant has 
lived here for 14 years. He has a home, spouse, and children here. His wife and 
children are U.S. citizens. He has been employed here since 1997. His COTR and the 
IT director at his company attest not only to his excellent work performance, but to his 
integrity. He has held a public trust position for years without incident.  
 
 Applicant has a house in India that he is trying to sell, and a small bank account 
of about $2,000. He intends to close the account as soon as the property is sold. 
Taken together, these Indian assets total just over $100,000. However, that financial 
interest is outweighed by his U.S. property, valued at almost $750,000, and his U.S. 
savings and investments worth more than $100,000. His U.S. assets represent a 
substantial tie to the United States. Given Applicant's family, economic, and social ties 
here, I conclude that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.h.   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
