 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 09-05096 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 7, 2009. On June 
30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 18, 2010. He initially requested an 
administrative determination on the record, but he later requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 1, 2011, 
 
2 
 
 
and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on January 12, 2011. It was 
reassigned to me on February 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 
14, 2011, scheduling the hearing for March 9, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on March 17, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, 
1.j, 1.l, and 1.n, and he explained that each of the debts alleged was included in a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. He admitted the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m, 
but contended that they were duplicates of other debts alleged in the SOR, and he 
explained that they were included in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. He admitted the 
previous Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. He denied the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a ship 
designer. He has worked for his current employer since March 2, 2009. (Tr. 21.) He has 
never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from November 1980 to October 1990 
and received an honorable discharge. After his discharge from the Marine Corps, he 
earned associate’s degrees in computer animation and computer design. (Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor describes him as a team player with a positive attitude and 
pride in his work. He regards Applicant as reliable, responsible, and honest. (AX H at 2; 
Tr. 37-44.) Applicant’s friend and former supervisor describes him as a talented 
mechanical designer, loyal, trustworthy, hard working, dedicated, and honest. (AX H at 
3.) A coworker describes him as honest, trustworthy, and dedicated. (AX H at 4.) 
Applicant’s performance appraisal for 2010 rated him as meeting expectations in all 
performance categories. (AX I.) 
 
 Applicant married in November 1998. He and his wife have a five-year-old 
daughter. 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a joint petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 
2000. They received a discharge in May 2000. (GX 9.) They resorted to bankruptcy 
after they incurred uninsured medical bills in excess of $6,000 due to food poisoning. 
(GX 3 at 7.) He was working as a computer repairman and making insufficient income to 
pay the medical bills. The medical creditors would not agree to payment plans and 
insisted on full payment. (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife was trained as a paralegal, and she started a business doing 
real estate closings in 2002, but it failed in 2007 due to the downturn in the housing 
market. Before the business began to decline, his wife was earning about $80,000 per 
year. Applicant and his wife depended on her business as their primary source of 
income. Applicant worked intermittently as a contractor, but his contract expired and he 
was laid off at about the time his wife’s business failed. (Tr. 59-62; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a home in 2002 for about $155,000. They 
refinanced the house, increasing the loan to about $330,000, and used the equity for 
improvements to the house. (Tr. 62-64.) After Applicant’s wife’s business failed in 2007, 
he was unemployed for about six months. They tried to sell the house, without success. 
After about six months, they moved in with family members and rented the house. (Tr. 
22.) After their tenants stopped paying rent, Applicant evicted them, spent additional 
funds to refurbish the property, and tried again to sell it. (Tr. 47.) They fell behind on 
their house payments, and the lender started foreclosure proceedings. The delinquent 
mortgage, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, was resolved in June 2010 by a short sale. (Answer to 
SOR; AX C; Tr. 47.) 
 
Applicant testified the auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is current and will be paid 
off in one year. (Tr. 47.) He did not submit any documentation about the auto loan, but 
his most recent credit report (GX 4) does not reflect any delinquent auto loans. 
Applicant and his wife have lived in a rented home since March 2009, and their rent is 
current. (AX B; Tr. 47.)  
 
Applicant testified that he contacted his other creditors, primarily credit card 
account holders. He testified that he was not able to negotiate any payment agreements 
because of his limited income and the high interest rates and large payoff amounts 
demanded by his creditors. (Tr. 23.) He did not submit any documentary evidence 
showing the extent of his efforts to settle the other debts. 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a second joint petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
September 2010. (GX 7; GX 8.) The petition was delayed because the United States 
trustee determined that the debtors’ case should be presumed to be an abuse of the 
bankruptcy process. The record does not reflect the specific basis for the trustee’s 
concern. In December 2010, the United States trustee determined that a motion to 
dismiss the petition was not appropriate. (AX D at 3-4.) 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy petition lists $26,104 in assets and $187,703 in total 
liabilities. All the creditors alleged in the SOR are included in the bankruptcy petition, 
except the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. The schedule of creditors includes 
Applicant’s two student loans, each in the amount of $45,464, and his wife’s two student 
loans totaling $4,522. He testified that he believed his student loans totaled about 
$60,000 and his wife’s about $10,000. (Tr. 69.) Their student loans (not alleged in the 
SOR) are in deferment based on hardship. (Tr. 48, 70.) The schedule of personal 
property includes a seven-year-old luxury SUV with 100,000 miles and a six-year-old 
economy car with 76 thousand miles. Applicant has paid for the economy car, but the 
 
4 
 
 
loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is for the SUV. As of the date the record closed, the 
bankruptcy petition was pending a decision. 
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy petition reflects that he has net monthly income of $3,531, 
and his wife has net monthly income of $2,654. It lists average monthly expenses 
totaling $6,960, leaving a shortfall of about $775. The expenses include parents’ car 
payments, insurance, and credit cards (GX 8 at Schedules I and J.). Applicant and his 
wife were both working for the same employer when they filed their bankruptcy petition. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that his wife is no longer employed, but the record 
does not reflect the reasons for her unemployment or the circumstances surrounding 
her change of employment status. (Tr. 71.)  
 
 In January 2008, Applicant attempted to enroll in a credit counseling and debt 
consolidation program, but he was not accepted because he had insufficient income. 
(AX A; Tr. 46-47.) He has completed the credit counseling and personal finance 
education required by the bankruptcy court. (AX E.)  
 
Applicant and his wife recently adopted a budget and established a system for 
paying bills and accumulating savings. Their budget reflects monthly net income of 
$3,800, expenses of $3,611, and monthly savings of $189. (AX F-G; Tr. 48.) Although 
their budget does not list expenses incurred on behalf of parents, the record does not 
fully reflect why the expenses in their monthly budget are so much lower than the 
expenses they reported in their bankruptcy petition. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
5 
 
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.n), including a home 
mortgage in foreclosure (SOR ¶ 1.h) and a delinquent car loan (SOR ¶ 1.i). It also 
alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in May 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.o). The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial history establishes two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). Thus, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts established by the evidence. 
 
“A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s personal debts. Rather, a security clearance adjudication is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in order to 
make a decision about an applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established, because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
recent, and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
Applicant and his wife experienced loss of employment and a business downturn. 
In hindsight, it was bad business judgment for Applicant and his wife to gamble their 
future on the real estate market. However, AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on whether they acted 
responsibly after encountering conditions beyond their control. The evidence reflects 
that they acted responsibly to resolve the delinquent home mortgage and the past-due 
payments on the auto loan. Applicant testified that they contacted the other creditors 
alleged in the SOR, but there is no documentary evidence in the record reflecting the 
extent of their efforts to negotiate settlements or payment agreements. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the home mortgage and automobile loan, but not for the 
other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
sought counseling from his credit union. He and his wife have completed the counseling 
required by the bankruptcy court. They have adopted a budget and new financial 
management practices. They have resolved the delinquent home mortgage and the 
past-due car payments. Their bankruptcy petition is pending, but the United States 
 
7 
 
 
trustee has expressed concerns about their entitlement to another Chapter 7 discharge. 
Even if a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge is granted, Applicant will be living on the 
financial edge, vulnerable to economic downturns, unexpected unemployment, or 
unanticipated expenses such as repairs on his aging automobiles. I conclude that the 
second prong AG ¶ 20(c) (“clear indications” that debts are being resolved or are under 
control) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy is a legally permissible remedy for indebtedness, but it 
does not necessarily establish good faith. Even if a delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable, the Government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances 
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely 
manner. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). Applicant 
must do more than show that he relied on a legally available option, such as 
bankruptcy, in order to claim the benefit of AG ¶ 20(c). See ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 
2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007). 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy in 2000 should have taught him about the dangerous 
consequences of not planning for the unexpected, but he apparently did not learn from 
that experience. Instead, he and his wife purchased a home two years later, gambling 
that her new business venture, their primary means of support, would be successful. 
They gambled on the housing market by borrowing heavily against their home equity for 
home improvements, purchasing an expensive luxury car, and incurring substantial 
credit card debt. To their credit, they responded responsibly to avoid foreclosure of their 
home and repossession of their automobile, but there is no evidence of actions to 
resolve their other delinquent debts. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) is established for the 
delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h and the delinquent auto loan alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.i, but not for the other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant asserted that the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k 
is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He also asserted that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m is a duplicate of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He provided no 
 
8 
 
 
documentation to show that the debts are duplicates, nor did he provide any evidence 
that he disputed the duplicate debts or asked the credit reporting agencies to delete 
them from his credit reports. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent adult. While he demonstrated responsible 
conduct regarding his defaulted mortgage and delinquent automobile loan, he has fallen 
short in exercising prudence and good judgment. He has been financially reactive rather 
than proactive. He is able to meet his current expenses, but he has no resources for 
unexpected expenses. He has not yet demonstrated a track record of responsible 
financial management. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
