KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s contention that her failure to respond to the File of Relevant Material was
due to poor advice from Department Counsel and her employer failed through lack of specificity. 
Board cannot consider new evidence she submitted in support of her appeal.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-04601.a1
DATE: 05/11/2011
DATE: May 11, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-04601
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 3, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided on the written record.  On February
28, 2011, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.
In this case, Applicant elected to have a decision based on the written record, and then did
not respond to the government’s file of relevant material (FORM).  On appeal, she seeks reversal
of the Judge’s adverse decision arguing that the Judge’s findings were not based on substantial
evidence, that he erred in the application of the mitigating conditions, and that his whole-person
analysis was erroneous.  In support of her argument, she submits an extensive amount of new
evidence, including a detailed statement addressing the allegations in the SOR and multiple
documentary exhibits.  The Board cannot consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.29.  
At the beginning of  her brief, Applicant makes the general assertion that she did not respond
to the government’s FORM because she detrimentally relied on poor advice from Department
Counsel and her employer, and thought she had provided all she could.  She does not specify what
advice she received, when it was provided, or who provided it.  Moreover, Applicant does not
advance that claim later in her brief as one of her “issues on appeal.”  Appeal Brief at 1.
Accordingly, Applicant’s claim in that regard fails for lack of specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No.03-11096 at 6 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2005)(Appealing party has the burden of raising claims of error
with sufficient specificity).  Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like a lawyer, they
are expected to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  Failure to
take those steps does not constitute a denial of their rights.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03307 at
2 (May 7, 2007). 
   
Applicant’s presentation does not demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious or contrary to law.  Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the
burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance
decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether
the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-13837 at
2 (App. Bd. Sep. 28, 2010).
In his decision, the Judge weighed the available evidence, evaluated the length and
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He reasonably explained why there was insufficient  mitigating evidence
to overcome the government’s security concerns.  Decision at 4-10.  The Board does not review a
case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant
data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection
between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v.
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v.
United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision
is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
