 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-08240 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an e-
QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On January 20, 2010, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of interrogatories. 
She responded to the interrogatories on February 15, 2010.2 On May 17, 2010, DOHA 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated May 12, 2008. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 15, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) for all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on an unspecified date. In a written 
statement, notarized June 15, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
September 2, 2010, she reversed her decision and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on September 3, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on October 4, 2010. 
A Notice of Hearing was issued on November 13, 2010, and I convened the hearing, as 
scheduled, on November 30, 2010. During the hearing, 3 Government exhibits (GE I, 
and 1-2) and 19 Applicant exhibits (AE A-S) were received without objection, and 
Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on December 7, 
2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.d. of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor, serving as a senior 
consultant.3 She is seeking to retain a secret security clearance previously granted to 
her in October 2008.4 A 2001 high school graduate, she received her bachelor of arts 
degree in psychology in 2005.5 She has completed a year and one-half of graduate 
work towards her master’s degree.6 She joined her current employer in April 2008.7 She 
never served in the military and never married.8  
 
3 Tr. at 80.  
  
4 Answer to the SOR, dated June 15, 2010. 
 
5 Id. at 13-15; Tr. at 30. 
 
6 Tr. at 8. 
 
7 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
8 Id. at 21, 24. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
Drug Involvement 
 
From September 2008 to at least April 2009, Applicant was a substance abuser 
whose choice of substances was the prescription medication Oxycontin.9 She initially 
encountered, but did not use, Oxycontin through her boyfriend.10 Applicant’s boyfriend 
had apparently initially obtained the drug legally from the hospital following an 
operation, and for several years thereafter, he acquired it illegally and used it in front of 
Applicant.11 In September 2008, because of recurring back pain, and out of curiosity, at 
the suggestion of her boyfriend, Applicant self-administered an 80 milligram dose of 
Oxycontin which had not been prescribed for her.12 On one other occasion, believed by 
Applicant to have occurred in November 2008, she inhaled Oxycontin, but doing so 
made her ill.13 Applicant continued to use Oxycontin, without a prescription, one to two 
times per month, and used it about 10 to 12 times during the entire period.14 She used 
Oxycontin with her boyfriend at his house in the evenings or during the weekend.15 She 
generally obtained the Oxycontin from her boyfriend or his friends.16  
 
On several occasions, at her boyfriend’s behest, Applicant drove him to his 
dealer to obtain more Oxycontin.17 Applicant observed her boyfriend paying for the 
Oxycontin on only one occasion,18 and she was aware that one of the dealers charged 
$60 per tablet.19 In April 2009, Applicant drove alone to one of the dealers to obtain 
three Oxycontin pills for her boyfriend.20 She returned to her boyfriend and delivered the 
Oxycontin to him.21 He took one pill and they left the residence. Applicant drove a few 
blocks and then pulled over to enable her boyfriend to “smoke” one of the Oxycontin 
pills. At that moment, a marked police unit pulled in front of them and undercover 
officers approached Applicant’s automobile. Applicant and her boyfriend were 
9 Answer to the SOR, dated Mar. 14, 2008, at 1. 
 
10 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 20, 2009), at 1, attached to 
Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories, supra note 2. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. at 2. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Tr. at 40-41. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
17 Id. at 1. 
 
18 Tr. at 61-62. 
 
19 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories – Corrections to Investigator’s Writeup), 
supra note 2, at 6. 
 
21 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
t.”  
im.   
                                                          
arrested.22 A search of her automobile revealed two Oxycontin pills, an unspecified 
anxiety pill, and several muscle relaxing pills.23 She was transported to the county 
women’s detention facility, and was released when her parents posted $5,000 bail.24 
The district attorney subsequently decided not to file formal charges against Applicant.25  
 
Applicant attributed her use of the unprescribed Oxycontin to a variety of 
reasons: she was struggling to obtain enough graduate school tuition; she was stressed 
over residing with her parents during a period of their domestic strife; she was 
depressed over being a burden to her parents; she was generally unhappy about her 
life; and she was curious about her boyfriend’s drug use.26 In addition, she said she had 
always played by the rules and never done anything wrong, but it resulted in 
unhappiness, so she did a reversal by dating the wrong type of guy and having fun;27 
she was involved with a person with a serious addiction problem;28 Oxycontin relieved 
her back pain or addressed her particularly bad day or bad mood;29 she looked upon 
the use of the unprescribed Oxycontin as different from the use of an illegal drug; and 
her boyfriend encouraged her to use it.30 Applicant also contends her use of Oxycontin 
was “an isolated inciden 31
 
Although the arrest was “terrifying” to Applicant,32 she continued seeing the 
same boyfriend on and off until August 2009.33 She tried getting him to abstain from 
further Oxycontin abuse, but he refused, so she attempted to end the relationship. Her 
efforts failed, and Applicant obtained a restraining order against h 34
 
Commencing in May 2009, and continuing until July 2009, Applicant went 
through four sessions of therapy with a marriage and family therapist (MFT), discussing 
22 Id.  
 
23 Id. at 2. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2 (Letter from district attorney, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answer 
to Interrogatories. 
 
26 Answer to the SOR, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
27 Tr. at 64. 
 
28 Id. at 24. 
 
29 Id. at 40-41. 
 
30 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 18, at 7. 
 
31 Tr. at 25. 
 
32 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 18, at 7. 
 
33 Tr. at 31. 
 
34 Id.; Applicant Exhibit G (Restraining Order After Hearing, dated September 15, 2009). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
the stressors in Applicant’s life and she learned about possible positive coping skills.35 
Applicant’s diagnosis was an adjustment disorder with some depression and anxiety 
symptoms.36 The therapist opined that Applicant was not in need of therapy from a 
chemical dependency specialist.37 In October 2010, more for the purposes of the 
security clearance review than a perceived need for further therapy,38 Applicant 
underwent an assessment and evaluation by a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) 
and substance abuse professional (SAP).39 Based on the mini-mental status exam, 
psychosocial interview, and a drug and alcohol screening protocol, it was the opinion of 
the LCSW/SAP that Applicant did not meet the criteria for a substance use disorder 
under the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV).40 He added: 
“[Applicant’s] behavior appears to be an isolated incident and it is unlikely that a single 
episode is cause for concern.”41 
 
On November 10, 2010, Applicant pledged not to use Oxycontin or any other 
controlled substance in the future.42 There is no evidence that she has used any illegal 
substance or unprescribed medication since April 2009. 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant received “exceeds” ratings for all assessment areas for the two rating 
periods commencing in April 2009 and ending in March 2010.43  She has been cited for 
her commitment to excellence, leadership, and dedicated efforts.44 She was fully 
consistent with the individual core ratings for respect, fairness, integrity, trust, and 
professionalism.45 Applicant’s immediate supervisor, a senior associate, is effusive in 
his praise of her. “[Applicant] has demonstrated responsibility, maturity and excellent 
judgment in all her work. . . . [Applicant’s] honesty and transparency is consistent with 
35 Applicant Exhibit M (Statement from MFT, dated June 3, 2010). 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Id. 
 
38 Tr. at 46-47. 
 
39 Applicant Exhibit N (Statement from LCSW/SAP, dated October 6, 2010). 
 
40 Id. 
 
41 Id. 
 
42 Applicant Exhibit K (Statement, dated November 10, 2010). 
 
43 Applicant Exhibit P (Annual Assessment, dated May 6, 2009); Applicant Exhibit Q (Annual Assessment, 
dated May 3, 2010). 
 
44 Applicant Exhibit E (Certificates of Commendation, undated). 
 
45 Id. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
her work ethic. She has earned my trust and strongest endorsement. . . .”46 Applicant 
was promoted to her current position on October 1, 2010.47 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”48 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”49   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”50 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
46 Applicant Exhibit R (Statement from supervisor, dated May 27, 2010). 
 
47 Applicant Exhibit S (E-mail from supervisor, dated October 19, 2010). 
 
48 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
49 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
50 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.51  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”52 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”53 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
51 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
52 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
53 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition),” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may 
raise security concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 25(g) may apply if there was “any illegal drug 
use after being granted a security clearance.” During the period September 2008 – April 
2009, nearly all of which Applicant possessed a security clearance, Applicant used, 
obtained, and transferred the misused prescription drug Oxycontin. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 
and 25(g), apply.   
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
Also, “satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not 
limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional,” may be mitigating under 
AG ¶ 26(d). 
AG ¶ 25(a) partially applies. Applicant attributed her drug use to a variety of 
circumstances and reasons: she was struggling to obtain enough graduate school 
tuition; she was stressed over residing with her parents during a period of their domestic 
strife; she was depressed over being a burden to her parents; she was generally 
unhappy about her life; she was curious about her boyfriend’s drug use; she said she 
 
9 
                                      
 
had always played by the rules and never done anything wrong, but it resulted in 
unhappiness, so she did a reversal by dating the wrong type of guy and having fun; she 
was involved with a person with a serious addiction problem; Oxycontin relieved her 
back pain or addressed her particularly bad day or bad mood; she looked upon the use 
of the unprescribed Oxycontin as different from the use of an illegal drug; and her 
boyfriend encouraged her to use it. While the environment in which Applicant found 
herself might be construed as somewhat stressful, her poor choices due to her inability 
to adjust to that environment, especially while holding a security clearance, is 
troublesome. Applicant did not specify which issues prompted her to use Oxtcontin, she 
merely offered the entire list of possibilities in an effort to justify her conduct. The fact 
that the use of the nonprescribed Oxycontin might be against the law was of little 
concern to her.  
 
Furthermore, while Applicant and her LCSW/SAP may characterize her actions 
as “a single episode” or “an isolated incident,” her course of conduct, involving her use, 
possession, and transfer of Oxycontin from September 2008 until her arrest in April 
2009, was far from being a single episode or isolated incident. That characterization by 
Applicant indicates that she has continued to minimize her actions, thereby increasing 
concerns. Applicant’s abstinence over the past 23 months is encouraging, but in light of 
the foregoing, the period is still too brief to establish that her substance abuse is unlikely 
to recur or that it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.   
AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. Applicant has taken certain efforts to demonstrate 
an intent not to abuse any drugs in the future. For several months after the arrest, she 
kept associating with her boyfriend, but finally (in December 2009) decided to end the 
relationship; she moved; on November 10, 2010, Applicant pledged not to use 
Oxycontin or any other controlled substance in the future; and she has completed 23 
months of abstinence.  
AG ¶ 26(d) partially applies. Applicant’s four therapy sessions with the MFT do 
not fully qualify as a “drug treatment program.” Likewise, her one session with the 
LCSW/SAP, during which she underwent a mini-mental status exam, psychosocial 
interview, and a drug and alcohol screening protocol, was not a drug treatment 
program, but rather an evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a LCSW who 
may or may not be a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program. There is no 
evidence of any such affiliation between the LCSW and any such recognized drug 
treatment program. Also, given the erroneous impression that Applicant’s “behavior 
appears to be an isolated incident and it is unlikely that a single episode is cause for 
concern,” there is a significant concern that his understanding of the facts is incomplete. 
Applicant’s conduct was ongoing over a several month period, not a single episode. 
Under these circumstances, the significance of the evidence presented by the LCSW is 
reduced.  
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
There is substantial evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct, for, until 
her drug abuse commenced, she: said she had always played by the rules and never 
done anything wrong; was a successful student, working on her master’s degree; was a 
good employee of a defense contractor, in a job she liked, holding a security clearance; 
was unable to adjust to her stressful environment; abstained for 23 months from 
Oxycontin use after her arrest; eventually disassociated herself from her addict 
boyfriend; altered her environment; sought some types of counselling and evaluation; 
and pledged not to use Oxycontin or any other controlled substance in the future.  
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is simply more substantial. 
During the period September 2008 – April 2009, nearly all of which Applicant possessed 
a security clearance, Applicant used, obtained, and transferred the unprescribed 
prescription drug Oxycontin. Her involvement in the illegal activity was curtailed only by 
her arrest. Applicant placed her own interests above her fiduciary responsibilities as a 
holder of a security clearance, and continued to exhibit a pattern of questionable 
judgment, irresponsibility, and immature behavior by using the substance. In addition, 
while Applicant and her LCSW/SAP may characterize her actions as “a single episode” 
or “an isolated incident,” her course of conduct, involving her use, possession, and 
transfer of Oxycontin, was more extensive than a single episode or isolated incident. 
That characterization by Applicant indicates that she has continued to minimize her 
actions, thereby increasing concerns. Applicant’s abstinence over the past 23 months is 
encouraging, but in light of the foregoing, the period is still too brief to establish that her 
substance abuse is unlikely to recur or that it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.   
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.54 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with substantial questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. While her continued abstinence is to be 
encouraged, nevertheless, I conclude Applicant has failed to fully mitigate the security 
concerns arising from her drug involvement.  See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
54 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
