 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )    ISCR Case No. 09-06750 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of excessive drinking, at times daily, to cope with anxiety and 
with work and marital stress. He received voluntary alcohol counseling in 2005 and again in 
2009, but despite a diagnosis of alcohol dependence and attendance at AA, he continued to 
abuse alcohol on occasion until July 2010. He began counseling in January 2011 with a 
psychotherapist well experienced in the treatment of substance abuse, but it is too soon to 
conclude that his alcohol abuse is safely behind him. Personal conduct concerns raised by 
Applicant‟s use of marijuana in May 2006, in knowing disregard of the Government‟s and his 
employer‟s policies prohibiting illegal drug use, are mitigated by the passage of time with no 
recurrence. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On August 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), which provided the basis 
for its preliminary decision to revoke his security clearance. DOHA took action under 
 
 
 2 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on August 18, 2010, and he requested 
a hearing.  The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2010, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. On November 12, 2010, I scheduled a hearing for December 15, 2010. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Twelve Government exhibits (Ex. 1-12) and 
two Applicant exhibits (Ex. A-B) were admitted without objection. Applicant also testified, as 
reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on December 23, 2010. I held the record open for 
post-hearing submissions from Applicant. Ten additional Applicant exhibits (Ex. C-L) were 
admitted after the hearing.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Post-Hearing Exhibits 
 
 At the hearing, I held the record open until February 9, 2011, for Applicant to obtain 
and to submit a report of an alcohol assessment. Applicant submitted a report of 
counseling sessions with a certified forensic counselor (Ex. D) and five character reference 
letters (Ex. E-I). Department Counsel did not object to their admission, and the exhibits 
were admitted. However, on expressed concerns from the Government about the 
qualifications of the substance abuse counselor, I reopened the record on February 17, 
2011, to give Applicant an opportunity to address those concerns. 
 
 On February 23, 2011, Applicant submitted information from the counselor‟s website 
(Ex. J), the counselor‟s curriculum vitae (Ex. K), and a pamphlet from Applicant‟s Employee 
Assistance Program (EAP) at work (Ex. L). The additional exhibits were entered into the 
record without objection. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, that Applicant 
consumed alcohol almost daily and at times to intoxication from about 1965 to at least 
January 2010 (SOR 1.a); and that he continued to drink alcohol (SOR 1.c, 1.d, 1.f) after 
being diagnosed with alcohol abuse in May 2005 (SOR 1.b), completing an alcohol 
treatment program from April 2009 to September 2009 (SOR 1.d), and being diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent in January 2010 (SOR 1.e). Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, 
Applicant was alleged to have tested positive in a random drug screen while holding a 
security clearance around May 2006 (SOR 2.a). 
 
 3 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant denied the Guideline G allegations, but admitted the 
positive drug test alleged under Guideline E. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and 
transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old community college graduate with an associate‟s degree in 
electronics technology awarded in June 1988. Since May 2009, Applicant has worked as 
an electrical engineering assistant for a defense contractor. Applicant held a secret-level 
security clearance with a previous employer from May 2002 to November 2006. (Ex. 1, 2, 
10.) 
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol and smoking marijuana as a teenager. Marijuana 
was his drug of choice during his youth, and he smoked it almost daily until he was in his 
early 30s. From the early 1970s to the mid-1980s, Applicant bought small quantities of 
marijuana for $40 each. He sold about three-quarters of the amount purchased to his 
friends to cover the cost of his own use. (Ex. 2, 3.) 
 
Starting in his mid-30s, Applicant began drinking a half pint to one pint of liquor to 
intoxication almost daily. Applicant continued to consume alcohol almost daily following his 
marriage in July 1987 and after the birth of his only child in February 1993, which caused 
problems in his marriage. He had stopped smoking marijuana, although when “jamming” 
with old friends, he was still in an environment conducive to illegal drug use. (Ex. 2, 3.) 
 
In December 2001 and April 2002, Applicant took pre-employment drug screens for 
an engineering specialist position with a defense contractor.
1
 He had worked for the 
company at another facility from July 1995 to October 1998. (Ex. 2.) The drug screens 
were negative for all substances tested, including marijuana. (Ex. 8.) Applicant was hired, 
and following a background investigation initiated by a security clearance application (SF 
86) dated December 15, 2001 (Ex. 2), Applicant was granted a secret-level security 
clearance in May 2002. (Ex. 10.) 
 
On May 20, 2005, Applicant underwent a psychiatric evaluation at the referral of his 
primary physician after he complained of anxiety. Frustrated with an inability to complete 
his job tasks because of coworkers‟ nonperformance, Applicant had been buying four to six 
small bottles of alcohol (one-ounce “nips”) to self-medicate at night after dinner. (Tr. 91.) 
He was diagnosed by a licensed mental health counselor (LCMHC) with anxiety disorder, 
not otherwise specified, and with alcohol abuse. Applicant had eight counseling sessions 
with the LCMHC between June 2005 and May 2006. As of early June 2005, Applicant had 
stopped buying nips on his way home from work, but he had purchased a six-pack of beer 
over the previous weekend. In August 2005, Applicant reported to the LCMHC that he had 
not been drinking alcohol. As of January 2006, there had been no change in primary 
                                                 
1 
Before the December 10, 2001, drug test and each subsequent substance abuse screening, Applicant 
signed a release with the understanding that the results could affect his eligibility for future employment or 
continued employment with the defense contractor. (Ex. 8.) 
 
 
 4 
diagnoses. While the primary focus of their sessions was anxiety and angry outbursts, the 
negative effects of alcohol were also discussed. In a session held in early May 2006, 
Applicant admitted to the LCMHC that he had recently used marijuana and tested positive 
during a random drug screen at work. (Ex. 11.) 
  
While “jamming” with an old band friend at a party around early May 2006, Applicant 
had smoked marijuana passed to him. (Ex. 4.) On the afternoon of May 2, 2006, Applicant 
took a random drug screen for his defense contractor employment, which was negative for 
all substances tested, but the specimen had been diluted. The next day, he was sent for 
another random drug screen, which was positive for marijuana. He was suspended from 
work for three days, and he was required to undergo counseling and follow-up drug 
screens. (Ex. 8, 10, 12.) He took six follow-up drug screens on random dates between 
June 2006 and October 2006, which were all negative for illegal substances. (Ex. 8.) 
Applicant understands that it was “stupid” to have smoked the marijuana because it could 
have cost him his job. (Tr. 81.) 
 
 On May 9, 2006, Applicant contacted an EAP counselor at the direction of human 
resource personnel at work. Applicant had been self-medicating with alcohol for stress over 
the previous year, and he was currently consuming one or two drinks twice or three times 
per week. He indicated that his use of marijuana was a “one time” event with an old friend 
when both became nostalgic about the times they played together in a rock band and 
smoked marijuana together. Applicant was referred for a two-session assessment, at a 
minimum, in light of his positive drug screen. Screening tests indicated a low probability of 
Applicant having a substance dependence disorder. The assessment was completed on 
May 18, 2006, and he was referred for brief therapy. (Ex. A.) Feeling anxious, Applicant 
sought a behavioral health evaluation on May 19, 2006. Mental health treatment was 
suspended pending required completion of his EAP sessions. (Ex. 9.) Applicant was 
considered candid and compliant during five individual counseling sessions held between 
May 31, 2006 and September 5, 2006. At the completion of the seven EAP sessions 
authorized, Applicant had unresolved work stress issues, but he was not referred for any 
further treatment. In a follow-up call to the EAP on September 13, 2006, Applicant 
indicated that he never had a drug problem, although he planned to continue seeing the 
counselor because he liked him. Applicant expressed frustrations with shift work on the job. 
(Ex. A.) 
 
In November 2006, Applicant began working for a new employer. (Ex. 1.) He agreed 
to abide by his new employer‟s policy concerning a drug-free workplace (Ex. 5), and there 
is no evidence that he violated that policy. At his annual review in December 2007, he was 
given a 3.23% increase in pay. One year later, he was laid off because of his poor 
performance.
2
 (Ex. 5.) 
                                                 
2 
Applicant indicates that he was terminated without good cause in December 2008, and that he was 
subsequently denied another job opportunity due to conflicting reference information from his previous 
employer. See Ex. 4; B. This job termination is relevant to the extent that it apparently led Applicant to seek 
counseling in March 2009. See Ex. 6. The Government did not allege the termination as a cause for security 
concern. 
 
 
 5 
 
In late December 2008, Applicant attended a few Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. In response to his spouse‟s concerns about his drinking and his own anger 
about his recent employment termination, Applicant voluntarily sought counseling. At intake 
in March 2009, Applicant reported a long history of drinking at the level of dependence, 
and stated that he did not have much to keep him from drinking at present. The director of 
substance abuse services, a licensed clinical social worker (LICSW), diagnosed Applicant 
with alcohol dependence.
3
 He recommended that Applicant attend weekly counseling and 
three or more AA meetings weekly, and that he also obtain an AA sponsor. Applicant 
attended an intensive outpatient alcohol counseling program at the facility four days a week 
plus two AA meetings per week until April 18, 2009. At discharge, the LICSW indicated that 
Applicant was able to make a commitment to sobriety. Aftercare recommendations 
included continued AA and follow-up with an individual therapist. (Ex. 6.) Applicant 
attended AA twice a week, and until September 2009, also weekly group sessions led by a 
former alcoholic. He drank up to five one-ounce nips of Southern Comfort on three 
occasions between March 2009 and September 2009, when he chose to discontinue 
attending the group sessions because he felt he was not getting any positive reinforcement 
for his efforts to quit drinking. (Ex. 4.) 
  
In May 2009, after passing a drug screen (Tr. 82), Applicant began his current 
employment. On June 19, 2009, he executed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He disclosed his use of marijuana on one occasion in 
May 2006. He responded affirmatively to question 24.a, “In the last 7 years, has your use 
of alcohol had a negative impact on your work performance, your professional or personal 
relationships, your finances, or resulted in intervention by law enforcement/public safety 
personnel?”, and added “Frequent use caused family problems.” He disclosed that he had 
recently started treatment with the LICSW for his alcohol use. (Ex. 1.) 
 
On July 22, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He reported that his alcohol consumption had 
caused him family-related problems for the past 20 plus years. He related that he was 
continuing to attend two Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per week. Applicant denied 
any marijuana use since he tested positive for the random drug screen two or three years 
ago because he realized it could jeopardize his employment. (Ex. 3, 4.) 
 
                                                 
3  
The SOR alleged January 2010 as the date of the diagnosis, apparently based on the date (January 10, 
2010) of the LICSW‟s signature on the intake evaluation. However, the LICSW indicated in a letter of January 
11, 2010, that Applicant had attended the intensive outpatient program and was able to make a commitment 
to sobriety. Clearly, Applicant did not have his evaluation one day and complete the program the next day. In 
all likelihood, the LICSW printed out a copy of an earlier intake evaluation for the investigator and then signed 
it in January 2010.  Applicant indicated on his June 2009 e-QIP (Ex. 1) that he was in voluntary treatment with 
the LICSW starting in April 2009. In his affidavit of January 2010 (Ex. 4), he indicated that the treatment began 
on March 3, 2009. Apparently, the diagnosis was rendered around March 2009, not January 2010 as alleged 
in SOR 1.e. In accord, Applicant testified that January 2010 was when the evaluation was received by the 
LICSW and not when he went to counseling. (Tr. 59.) The evidence does not establish the Government‟s 
continued assertion (see Tr. 65.) of a diagnosis of alcohol dependence in 2010. 
 
 6 
On January 7, 2010, Applicant completed an affidavit for OPM. He acknowledged 
that he had continued to consume alcohol after September 2009, up to four ounces of 
Southern Comfort about every third night. Because he and his spouse argued over his 
drinking, he concealed this drinking from her. He indicated that his goal was to quit drinking 
entirely. While he did not currently have a sponsor in AA and was not sure whether he 
wanted to be involved in AA, he was still going to at least two AA meetings a week because 
he felt some benefit from them, and they occupied time that he might otherwise spend 
drinking. Applicant volunteered that he had purchased and sold marijuana to friends until 
the mid-1980s. He denied any use of marijuana thereafter, except for the one-time use 
while “jamming” with his old friend, which led to the positive urinalysis. He denied any intent 
to use any illegal drug, including marijuana, in the future. (Ex. 4.) 
 
Despite his ongoing attendance at regular AA meetings (no step meetings) until 
June 2010 (Tr. 98-99, 104), Applicant continued to abuse up to five “nips” of alcohol on 
occasion, largely to self-medicate to deal with frustration and anxiety. (Tr. 102, 108.) He 
had a prescription for Paxil that he took when he felt like it, although it was prescribed for 
daily use. (Tr. 109-11.) 
 
After drinking at home and arguing with his spouse on July 9, 2010, Applicant was 
charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) and with a restraining order being filed against 
him.
4 
(Ex. D.) The charge was apparently dismissed, and the restraining order was 
vacated, but his spouse filed for divorce. (Ex. D; Tr. 102, 115.) It motivated Applicant to 
stop drinking (Tr. 101.), and he was still maintaining abstinence as of January 2011. (Ex. 
B.)  He had not returned to AA before his hearing in mid-December 2010 because he did 
not see a need for it, although at the hearing he perceived a need to resume AA to show 
the Department of Defense that he was capable of taking care of himself. (Tr. 100) He did 
not think that he had a problem with alcohol, although the possibility of a relapse was 
something he thought about daily. (Tr. 103.) The pending divorce had lessened the stress 
that led him to drink in the past. (Tr. 115.) 
 
On December 28, 2010, after the hearing on his security clearance eligibility, 
Applicant sought an evaluation from a psychotherapist certified in substance abuse 
counseling and with 36 years of experience in the field. (Ex. J, K.) Starting on January 7, 
2011, Applicant began individual counseling with this psychotherapist on a biweekly basis 
to reinforce the goal of continued sobriety and to cope with a difficult divorce. Applicant 
also agreed to attend AA. As of late January 2011, the counselor opined that Applicant was 
motivated to remain abstinent from alcohol. He assessed Applicant‟s prognosis as “very 
good anticipating continued efforts towards alcohol recovery, relapse prevention, and 
compliance with counseling and AA.” (Ex. D.) 
 
                                                 
4 
 Applicant testified at his hearing that his last drink was on July 9, 2010. He had problems with his wife and 
“the issues that came to be that it was the day that [he] stopped drinking.” Applicant recalled drinking Southern 
Comfort at home that day. He did not volunteer that he had been arrested for drunk driving. (Tr. 102.) The 
psychotherapist referenced Applicant‟s arrest for drunk driving in his assessment of late January 2011. (Ex. 
D.) 
 
 7 
Applicant met his employer‟s expectations for his work performance in 2009 in that 
he achieved all job objectives and met requirements in various job competencies, such as 
attendance, compliance with ethics, customer satisfaction, and job knowledge. (Ex. B.) 
Applicant‟s supervisor found Applicant to possess an excellent work ethic and to produce 
work of “top notch” quality. He considers Applicant to be a valuable member of their team. 
(Ex. C, G.) A mechanical designer familiar with Applicant‟s work for the past year also 
found him to be “dependable, reliable, and hard-working.” (Ex. E.) An electrical engineer 
described Applicant as having “a very even temperament.” (Ex. H.) A former coworker, who 
continues to play guitar with Applicant and is familiar with his marital situation, attests to 
Applicant being “more focused” now that he is on his own. (Ex. F.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
 
 8 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness.” 
Applicant began drinking alcohol to intoxication almost daily in the mid-1980s. By May 
2005, he had turned to alcohol to cope with work and marital anxiety and stress. With the 
help of voluntary counseling for anxiety in 2005, and employer-mandated EAP counseling 
in 2006 following the positive drug test, his drinking moderated somewhat. Yet by 2009, he 
had developed an alcohol dependency problem. Several Guideline G disqualifying 
conditions are implicated. 
 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent,” applies because of an incident that involved Applicant‟s spouse in July 2010. 
Applicant provided little detail at his hearing other than he had consumed alcohol. A report 
from Applicant‟s psychotherapist, submitted post-hearing, revealed that Applicant had been 
arrested for DWI and that a restraining order had been filed against him. (Ex. D.) Although 
the drunken driving charge was apparently dismissed and the domestic violence restraining 
order was vacated without a finding, the alcohol-related incident was the final straw in a 
marriage marked by discord because of his drinking.  
 
AG ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent,” is established. For years, Applicant regularly drank to intoxication after 
work and on the weekends. When he sought outpatient treatment in March 2009, Applicant 
revealed “a long-standing history of drinking at the level of dependence.” (Ex. 6.) 
 
The evidence warrants consideration of AG ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence,” even in the absence of a specific reference to the diagnostic 
criteria. The psychotherapist, with whom Applicant began counseling in January 2011, is 
well-qualified to render a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence. In his 
assessment letter of January 27, 2011 (Ex. D), he indicated that Applicant sought 
counseling “at a time of domestic turmoil and alcohol abuse.” The psychotherapist also 
stated that the focus of their sessions was “to reinforce the goals of continued sobriety,” 
and that Applicant was motivated to remain abstinent from alcohol.” Even as to Applicant‟s 
 
 9 
prognosis, the psychotherapist‟s comments indicate Applicant has an alcohol problem (“His 
prognoses [sic] is very good anticipating continued efforts towards alcohol recovery. . . .”). 
 
AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” is 
firmly established. The LCMHC, who counseled Applicant primarily for anxiety from May 
2005 to May 2006, at the referral of Applicant‟s physician, diagnosed Applicant with an 
unspecified anxiety disorder and with alcohol abuse. (Ex. 11.) More recently, Applicant was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence by the LICSW, who serves as the director of 
substance abuse services for the intensive outpatient program Applicant completed in 
2009. (Ex. 6.) 
 
Applicant drank Southern Comfort liquor on three occasions while in that intensive 
outpatient program or its aftercare component, which included AA and his participation in 
group counseling led by a former alcoholic. After he stopped going to those group sessions 
in September 2009, he continued his twice-weekly attendance at regular AA meetings. Yet, 
he also continued to drink up to four or five ounces of Southern Comfort about every third 
night until July 2010, when he was arrested for drunk driving. This sustained relapse 
triggers security concerns under AG ¶ 22(f), “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or 
dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” 
 
None of the mitigating conditions under Guideline G apply. His abuse of alcohol to 
as recently as July 2010 removes his case from any serious consideration of AG ¶ 23(a), 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual‟s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Apart from the EAP counseling 
required by Applicant‟s then employer after the May 2006 positive drug test, his alcohol 
counseling has been voluntary, albeit prompted in 2009 by his spouse‟s concerns and in 
2011 by the need to demonstrate to the Department of Defense that he is capable of taking 
care of himself. These actions to overcome his drinking problem are viewed in his favor 
and partially implicate AG ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or 
issues of abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol 
abuser).” However, given his years of abusive alcohol consumption, his present abstinence 
since July 2010 is not long enough to guarantee against relapse. In addition, while 
Applicant testified to his intent to abstain from alcohol, he did not feel that he had a 
problem with alcohol as of mid-December 2010. (Tr. 103.) 
 
As of late January 2011, Applicant was a “current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program,” but his abusive drinking after completing the intensive 
outpatient program precludes me from applying AG ¶ 23(c) (stating, “the individual is a 
current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history 
of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress”). So too, Applicant 
fails to fully satisfy AG ¶ 23(d), which provides as follows: 
 
 
 10 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant‟s surreptitious drinking at home from September 2009 through July 9, 2010, 
which he did not always successfully conceal from his spouse, makes it difficult to conclude 
that his outpatient counseling was a success, even though he completed the program‟s 
requirements. His present abstinence starting July 10, 2010, is viewed favorably, but even 
so, a longer period is required before it shows “a clear and established pattern.” Although 
Applicant attended AA at least twice a week from around March 2009 to June 2010, he 
was not committed to the program. He continued to drink alcohol and was not involved in 
any step work. He also did not obtain a sponsor in AA. As of December 2010, he had no 
reason for ceasing his AA attendance other than he was taking a break. Having abused 
alcohol in the past to self-medicate symptoms of anxiety, Applicant was risking relapse by 
not taking his Paxil on a regular basis, and he had no support network in place to aid him in 
maintaining sobriety. After the hearing, Applicant presented a “very good” prognosis from a 
well-qualified psychotherapist with many years of experience in treating substance abuse. 
Yet, that prognosis is conditioned on Applicant‟s “continued efforts towards alcohol 
recovery, relapse prevention, and compliance with counseling and AA.” There is no 
evidence about the extent of Applicant‟s participation in AA, if any. He needs to 
demonstrate through his actions a sustained commitment to his recovery before I can 
conclude that the alcohol consumption concerns are fully mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in Guideline E, AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct security concerns are raised by Applicant‟s use of marijuana in 
May 2006, while possessing a security clearance and knowing that it was against his 
employer‟s and the DoD‟s policies against such drug use. In addition to raising concerns 
about the quality of his judgment generally under AG ¶ 15, AG ¶ 16(f), “violation of a written 
or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a condition of 
employment,” is implicated. On May 2, 2006, Applicant signed a substance abuse 
screening release affirming to his understanding that a positive result for illegal drugs could 
 
 11 
affect his eligibility for future employment or continued employment with the defense 
contractor. The result of that test was negative, but the specimen had been diluted. 
Applicant was sent for another test the following day, and he executed a similar release. 
He tested positive for marijuana that he had smoked at a party. (Ex. 8.) 
 
 Applicant was no stranger to marijuana. He used it almost daily, until he was in his 
early 30s. He even sold some of the marijuana he purchased to friends. The Government 
chose not to allege his marijuana use under Guideline H, drug involvement,
5
 presumably 
because Applicant had abstained for some 20 years before he smoked the marijuana in 
2006, and it was not likely sufficient by itself for an adverse determination under Guideline 
H. That said, AG ¶ 16(d) cannot strictly apply because marijuana use is explicitly covered 
under AG ¶ 24(a) and ¶ 25(a). AG ¶ 16(d) states as follows: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” and 
include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens). AG ¶ 25(a) is implicated by “any 
drug abuse.” 
 
 Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 17(c) and ¶ 17(d) apply to alleviate the judgment 
concerns raised by Applicant‟s marijuana use in 2006. Applicant‟s use of marijuana cannot 
reasonably be considered a minor offense, but it occurred four years ago and only once in 
the last 25 years. In terms of conduct that could reasonably give rise to security concerns 
as of August 2010, “so much time has passed” and it was “so infrequent” to satisfy those 
components of AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” This is so in light of his counseling for that abuse with the EAP clinician, his 
expressed intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future, and the absence of recurrence 
as confirmed through October 2006 by a series of negative drug screens. AG ¶ 17(d), “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior 
or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur,” applies. 
                                                 
5  
Under Guideline H, AG ¶ 24,  “Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises 
questions about a person‟s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
 
 12 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a long history of alcohol 
abuse that culminated in his arrest for drunk driving in July 2010. While Applicant has been 
abstinent from alcohol since then, he has been taking his Paxil medication only on 
occasion, even though he apparently had a prescription for daily use (“I don‟t take it on a 
daily basis because a lot of times I don‟t feel that I need or I just forget, but I don‟t take it 
regularly.”). The risk of relapse to self-medicate cannot be ruled out in light of his history of 
abusing alcohol to cope with anxiety and marital and work-related stress. Furthermore, it 
remains to be seen whether Applicant will comply with the treatment regimen he began in 
January 2011, and whether he will gain the insight and tools needed for sustained sobriety. 
He and his spouse were in the process of divorcing, and in the opinion of his 
psychotherapist, Applicant needed support to help with the transition to his new family 
situation. Applicant has not allowed alcohol to negatively affect his work, but based on the 
totality of the facts and circumstances, I cannot conclude that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or restore security clearance eligibility to Applicant at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 13 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
