1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-01543
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows she has a well-
documented and lengthy history of drug abuse and related criminal conduct, which
ceased in 2000. She presented sufficient evidence of reform and rehabilitation to
mitigate the drug involvement and criminal conduct security concerns. She did not give
deliberately false answers to three questions about her police record when completing a
security clearance application in 2008. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is
decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 115–116. 2
 Tr. 18–19. 3
 Tr. 105–109.4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on August 3,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it endeavored to set forth Applicant’s history of drug abuse under Guideline H; her
related criminal conduct under Guideline J; and three allegations that she gave false
answers in response to questions on a August 2008 security clearance application
under Guideline E.    
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me January 26, 2011. The hearing took place February 24, 2011. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received March 3, 2011. 
At the close of evidence, I kept the record open until March 16, 2011, to allow
Applicant to present documentary evidence in addition to Exhibits A–E. Her timely post-
hearing document, a letter from the drug treatment program, is marked and admitted as
Exhibit F without objections.      
Procedural and Evidentiary Matters 
At hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.c to
correct a drafting error as follows: the phrase “as set forth in 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j, above” was
amended to “as set forth in 2.h, 2.i, and 2.j, above.”  The motion was granted without2
objections. 
 
Also at hearing, Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶ 2.e, an allegation of motor
vehicle theft in 1988, because Applicant was the victim not the perpetrator in that case.3
In addition, Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶¶ 2.i and 2.j, allegations of transporting
illegal aliens and making a fictitious or fraudulent statement in 2004, because those
charges involved another individual with a similar name.  Accordingly, those matters are4
not addressed further.   
 Exhibit E. 5
 Exhibit A. 6
 Exhibit B. 7
 Exhibit C. 8
 Exhibit D. 9
 See Exhibits 1–9, 11, 13, 17, 18, and F. 10
3
Concerning documentary exhibits, the following Government Exhibits were not
admitted for the reasons stated during the hearing: Exhibit 10, Exhibit 12, Exhibit 14,
Exhibit 15, and Exhibit 16. In addition, Exhibit 18 was admitted for a limited purpose as
stated during the hearing. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s answers to the SOR allegations were mixed with admissions and
denials as well as explanations. Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for the first time. She has worked as a senior media
production associate in the print services department of the company since May 2008.
Her employment history includes working in the print industry since 2001, although she
had a five-month period of unemployment due a job layoff in 2003. She has had full-
time employment since September 2003. Her job-performance reports from 2008–2010
are indicative of a good employment record for her current job.  Her initial report was5
average, and she has received an overall rating of “exceeds requirements” for the last
two years.  
Applicant’s personal references are consistent with her recent job-performance
reports. A current coworker describes her “a caring and open person” as well as an
“organized, efficient, and extremely competent” employee.”  A former coworker who has6
known her for eight years describes her as a hard worker who understands the
importance of confidentiality.  A second former coworker describes her as hardworking,7
loyal, and dependable.  A third former coworker describes her as a highly dedicated8
employee.9
Applicant has a well-documented and lengthy history of drug abuse and related
criminal conduct.  Her drug of choice was heroin, which she used intravenously. She10
was introduced to heroin at age 12 by her uncle who was a drug dealer. Over the years,
she also used a mixture of cocaine and heroin, a practice known as “speedballing.” She
had her first child at age 15, and she was able to stop using illegal drugs during and
after her pregnancy. At age 17, she married her child’s father. She had two more
 Exhibit 9. 11
 Tr. 130. 12
 Exhibit 3. 13
 Methadone is a synthetic opioid, used in medicine as an analgesic and a maintenance anti-addictive for use14
in patients with opioid dependency. Although chemically unlike morphine or heroin, methadone acts on the
same opioid receptors as these drugs, and thus has many of the same effects. 
 Tr. 78. 15
 Exhibit 3 at 7. 16
4
children during the marriage, which ended by divorce in 1993. Other than a little periodic
marijuana use, she used no other illegal drugs until about 1986 or 1987, when she and
her husband separated some years before the final divorce. One of the people with
whom she used drugs with, and engaged in related criminal activity with, is the father of
her youngest child. In about 1988, that person was prosecuted, convicted, and
incarcerated. Applicant was drug-free during the five years of his imprisonment. She
attended drug treatment during this time. She reconnected with this person at some
point after his release from prison. That led to further drug abuse, which continued until
2000, although she had some periods during 1993–2000 when she did not use. 
The seminal event that led Applicant to her ongoing recovery occurred in
February 2000, when she was in a house raided by a police SWAT unit as a probable
location of heroin dealing and use.  She was detained and questioned by the police,11
but not arrested or prosecuted. The event was a wake-up call for Applicant, as she
decided that she was “sick and tired of being out on the street, using and abusing and
people abusing [her] and not knowing where [she] was going to wake up the next day
and, you know, going to jail.”  At about this time, she met a drug-free gentleman and12
began a romantic relationship with him that lasted until about 2007. This gentleman
was, apparently, a key factor in Applicant’s recovery. Initially, he paid for her to
participate in a private program before she was accepted into the current program. 
From about July 2000 to the present, Applicant has participated in a nonprofit
substance abuse program. The extensive medical records, provided by Applicant in
response to interrogatories, show that she has been assessed or diagnosed with opioid
dependence.  She now participates in a prescribed methadone  treatment program.13 14
She is engaged in a self-paced process of gradually decreasing the dosage, with the
goal of eliminating methadone use. She reported that her daily dosage has decreased
from about 75 mg to 16 mg.  She reported that has earned the privilege of taking home15
a 13-day dosage, as opposed to reporting daily for medication. Her testimony was
consistent with the medical records, which reflect, as of January 2010, she was stable
with a methadone dose of 22 mg and 13-day take-home privileges.  Her current status16
is summarized in a March 2011 letter from the treatment program as follows:
 Exhibit F. 17
 Tr. 89–90. 18
 Exhibit 6 at 3–4. 19
 Tr. 127. 20
 Exhibit 1. 21
5
[Applicant] is currently participating in the methadone maintenance
treatment program since June 2003, and has demonstrated continued
progress towards her recovery by maintaining counselor-client contact,
abiding by all federal and clinic rules, providing negative toxicology
reports, and following her treatment plan. Her prognosis for continued
stability, and maintenance of a drug free lifestyle is rated as favorable, and
is assessed at being in the maintenance stage of change with a healthy
history of long term commitment to recovery.    17
Applicant no longer associates with anyone involved in illegal drugs, and has not
done so in years. After her relationship with the gentleman ended in about 2007, she
lived with her adult children on a temporary basis. She has lived alone, albeit in her
son’s house, since late 2009. She rents the house from her son, who is away serving in
the U.S. armed forces.  
Applicant’s criminal conduct is related to drug abuse. Unable to hold a steady
job, she committed crimes to support her habit.  She stole things she could sell and18
used the money to buy drugs. During 1987–1999, she had arrests, charges, or
convictions for offenses such as possession of drug paraphernalia, shoplifting, theft,
burglary, probation violation, etc. The most serious appears to be an arrest in 1988 for
multiple felony theft and burglary offenses. She pleaded guilty to three counts of
burglary and was sentenced to, among other things, five years of probation. Since the
raid by the SWAT unit in 2000, she was involved in a single incident of criminal conduct,
but it was not related to her past drug abuse. In 2002, Applicant pushed the former
girlfriend of the gentleman with whom she was then involved. She acknowledged at
hearing she did so out of jealously. She was charged with the offense of assault-
recklessly cause injury, but it was dismissed without prejudice in February 2003.  In19
total, she estimates serving about eight to nine months in jail for her various crimes.   20
Applicant began her current employment in May 2008, after going through the
company’s hiring process, which included passing a drug test (she disclosed her
methadone use). Thereafter, in August 2008, she completed a security clearance
application in which she answered various questions about her background.  She fully21
disclosed her methadone use on a prescription basis in response to the relevant
question. 
 Exhibit 8. 22
 Tr. 111–112. 23
 Tr. 112–114. 24
 Tr. 114–118. 25
 Tr. 49–67. 26
 Tr. 60. 27
6
Concerning her police record, in response to Question 23a, which asked about
ever having been charged with or convicted of a felony offense, she answered “Yes”
and disclosed the felony-level burglary offenses that ended in five years of probation
and drug treatment. She did not report the 1995 arrest and charge for third-degree
burglary, which was dismissed.  She did not report the more recent burglary (SOR ¶22
2.g) because she did not remember it, in part, because it was dismissed.  In response23
to Question 23d, which asked about ever having been charged with or convicted or any
alcohol- or drug-related offenses, she answered in the negative. She did not report
charges of possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h) because she
did not understand the scope of the question went beyond the actual drugs to include
drug paraphernalia.  She understood the question included things such as possession24
of cocaine, but did not include drug paraphernalia. And in response to Question 23f,
which asked about  arrests, charges, or convictions within the last seven years not
otherwise reported, she answered in the negative. She did not report the 2002 assault
offense (SOR ¶ 2.h) because she did not remember it, in part, because it was
dismissed.  25
At hearing, Applicant’s sister testified about her involvement with Applicant.  The26
sister is a recently retired employee of the same company that employs Applicant. The
sister has been involved with Applicant over the years and has participated in her
treatment. The sister has seen “tremendous change”  in Applicant since 2000 to27
include the following: (1) a vastly improved physical appearance; (2) improved health;
(3) full-time employment for many years; (4) financial stability, to include buying two
vehicles, the most recent of which was a new vehicle; (5) reestablishing  relationships
with her children; (6) responsible behavior on a day-to-day basis; (7) active participation
and involvement in a church; (8) immaculate housekeeping; and (9) improved self-
esteem. At one point, Applicant lived with and cared for her sister while her sister
recovered from the effects of a stroke. As a former employee who held a security
clearance, the sister candidly acknowledged that she would not have trusted Applicant
in the past, but she is now of the opinion that Applicant can be trusted.   
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to28
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.29
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 30
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 31
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).32
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.33
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.34
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.35
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 36
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).37
7
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As28
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt29
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An30
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  31
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting32
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An33
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate34
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme35
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.36
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.37
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.38
 AG ¶¶ 24–26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 39
 AG ¶ 24(b). 40
 AG 30–32 ¶¶ (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 41
8
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it38
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
1. Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct
These matters are discussed together because the evidence shows they are
factually interrelated. Under Guideline H,  the concern is the use of an illegal drug, or39
misuse of a prescription drug, raises questions about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. In this context, the term drug abuse means “the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from the approved medical
direction.”  Under Guideline J,  the concern is that criminal activity can raise questions40 41
about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Both guidelines share a
concern about a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.
Here, the evidence is more than sufficient to establish concerns based on
Applicant’s well-documented and lengthy history of drug abuse and related criminal
conduct. The evidence shows Applicant was a drug abuser whose drug of choice was
heroin, which she sometimes mixed with cocaine. Introduced to drug abuse at an early
age, she engaged in it until 2000. She also engaged in criminal conduct to pay for her
drugs, and she has several arrests, charges, and convictions to show for it. The last
drug-related arrest took place in 1995, although she was questioned as a suspect
during the SWAT raid in 2000. She had a relatively minor incident of criminal conduct
(the assault charge) in 2002, but it ended in dismissal not a conviction. This incident
appears to be aberrational conduct by Applicant, and it no longer raises a concern. 
Based on the evidence as a whole, the following disqualifying conditions under
Guideline H are raised:
9
AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse;
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia;
AG ¶ 25(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug
dependence; and 
AG ¶ 25(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed
clincal social worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment
program.
And under Guideline J, the following disqualifying conditions are raised:  
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted; and 
AG ¶ 31(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated program. 
There are several mitigating conditions to consider under each guideline. The
following mitigating conditions under Guideline H are most pertinent: 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and 
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,
such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
 AG ¶¶ 15–17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 42
 AG ¶ 15. 43
10
And under Guideline J, the following mitigating conditions are most pertinent: 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community involvement.
After considering the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions, the central
issue is whether Applicant presented sufficient evidence of reform and rehabilitation to
mitigate and overcome the obvious security concerns under both guidelines. I conclude
that she has done so. Her drug abuse and related criminal conduct ceased more than
ten years ago in 2000. She has accomplished much since, such as: (1) a long-term
relationship with a drug-free gentleman; (2) full-time employment in the print industry for
many years; (3) a good employment record; (4) disassociation from her drug-using
associates along with reestablishing relationships with family members; (5) regular
participation in her church and church-related activities; (6) satisfactory participation in a
recognized drug treatment program for many years, which is ongoing; and (7) a
favorable prognosis from the drug treatment program. Viewing these circumstances as
points on a graph or scale, the overall trend is both positive and upward. The evidence
as a whole supports a conclusion of a long-term record of reform and rehabilitation
beginning in 2000 and continuing to present.    
2. Personal Conduct
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be42
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  43
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9). 44
11
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the
information did not need to be reported. 
The issue here is whether Applicant made deliberately false statements when
answering three questions about her police record on her 2008 security clearance
application. Based on the evidence, to include her hearing testimony, which I found
credible, I am not persuaded she made deliberately false statements. In response to
Question 23a, she did not report the 1995 burglary charge, which was dismissed,
because she did not recall it. In response to Question 23d, she did not report the
possession of drug paraphernalia charges because she misunderstood the question.
And in response to Question 23f, she did not report the 2002 assault charge, which was
dismissed, because she did not remember it. Moreover, by answering in the affirmative
to other questions on the application, she put the Government on notice of her past drug
abuse and related criminal conduct. I am not persuaded that Applicant was attempting
to mislead or conceal information in order to put her security clearance application in a
more favorable light.   
3. Whole-Person Concept
I have considered this case in light of the evidence as a whole and the nine-
factor whole-person concept.  In particular, I considered the nature, extent, and44
seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the conduct; the frequency
and recency of the conduct; the age when she was introduced to drug abuse and her
age at the time of the conduct; the presence of rehabilitation and other positive
changes; and the likelihood of recurrence of the drug abuse and related criminal
conduct. 
With those factors in mind, a thoughtful balancing of the evidence requires that
we view Applicant in the totality of her acts, both negative and positive, past and
present, and look below the surface of the case, which is not attractive, to make a
thorough assessment and evaluation of Applicant’s current security suitability. For many
years now, she has engaged in a controlled,  monitored, and lawful program to abstain
from drug abuse, she is succeeding in this regard, and she has a favorable prognosis.
During this period, she has not engaged in drug abuse or related criminal conduct. This
lengthy period amounts to substantial evidence of reform and rehabilitation, and it is
persuasive evidence. I base this conclusion, in part, on my opportunity to observe her
demeanor and listen to her testimony during the course of a three-hour hearing. Her full,
frank, and candid testimony, coupled with her simple dignity throughout the hearing,
persuades me that her drug abuse and related criminal conduct are safely in the past
and unlikely to recur.  
 Decided for Applicant because it merely alleges a minor traffic violation in 2006 (failure to obey traffic control45
device), which was dismissed; it was not a criminal offense. See Exhibit 6 at 1–2. 
12
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to overcome the security
concerns, and I am persuaded that she will exercise the required good judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.j: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Withdrawn
Subparagraphs 2.f–2.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 2.j: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 2.k: For Applicant45
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 3.a–3.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.           
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
