 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-05111 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
On August 5, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 22, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. DOHA received his response on June 25, 2010. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 20, 2010. The case was initially assigned to 
another administrative judge on July 27, 2010; and was reassigned to me on August 8, 
2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 7, 2010, scheduling the hearing 
for September 28, 2010.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 6, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old custodian, who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 2008. He seeks a security clearance to enhance his position within his 
company. A clearance would allow Applicant access to secure areas without the need 
for an escort. He also holds another job as lead custodian with his father’s cleaning 
company. (GE 1, Tr. 16-20.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1997. He attended a nine-month 
trade school course from January 2006 to September 2006, and was awarded a 
veterinary assistant certificate. He has never married; however, he lives with a woman 
and they have two minor children together. (GE 1, Tr. 20-27.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR lists ten separate allegations covering a range of conduct spanning the 
ten-year period from 1998 to 2008. Such conduct includes drug involvement, traffic 
infractions to include driving under the influence (DUI), and falsification of his August 
2008 e-QIP. (GE 1 – GE 7.) These allegations are not in dispute and a brief description 
of each occurrence follows: 
 
Drug Use/Involvement  
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1998 to 2004. He 
estimated that he used marijuana three times a week during that six-year period. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana shortly after his daughter was born in July 2003 
“realizing that [he] needed to change [his] ways.” He adamantly asserted that he has not 
used marijuana since 2004 and has no intention of using it in the future. (GE 2(I-20, I-
22), GE 4, Tr. 27-30, 62.)  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
In February 1998, Applicant was charged with (1) possession of marijuana, (2) 
possession of drug paraphernalia, and (3) failure to appear. He was found guilty of 
possession of drug paraphernalia and ordered to pay a fine and obtain counseling. The 
remaining charges were dismissed. Applicant stated he was about 19 years old at the 
time of this arrest and was “young and dumb.” (GE 2(I-19), Tr. 30-31, 62-63.) 
 
In June 2001, Applicant was charged in two separate cases. In the first case, he 
was charged with (1) assault, (2) criminal damage, and (3) possession of drug 
paraphernalia. He was found guilty of criminal damage and the remaining charges were 
dismissed. In the second case, he was charged with (1) second degree assault, (2) third 
degree assault, and (3) criminal damage. He was found guilty of second degree assault 
and criminal damage. The remaining charge was dismissed. As a result of these 
convictions, he was sentenced to 30 days in jail, ordered to pay a fine and court costs, 
ordered to obtain counseling, and was placed on 12 months probation. As of the date 
the SOR was issued, Applicant had not paid his fine and court costs. Applicant stated 
he attended anger management counseling which he described as “somewhat helpful.” 
The charges stem from a party at night that got out of hand and evolved into a “big 
fight.” (GE 2(I-17, I-19), Tr. 31-34, 63-65.) 
 
In March 2004, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana. He pled 
guilty to the lesser offense of drug paraphernalia possession. He was ordered to pay a 
fine and obtain counseling, and was placed on 12 months probation. As of the date the 
SOR was issued, Applicant had not paid his fine. Applicant stated that he was pulled 
over by the police for a traffic-related offense. The police searched his car and 
discovered “seeds in the car” which they considered paraphernalia. (GE 2(I-16, I-18), 
Tr. 34-36, 65.) 
 
 Traffic Infractions/DUI 
 
In April 2006, Applicant was charged with (1) improper light on license plate, and 
(2) driving with a suspended license for failure to appear or pay fines. He pled guilty to 
both charges and was fined. Applicant stated that he paid this fine. (GE 2(I-17), Tr. 36-
38, 66.) 
 
In November 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) speeding 22 
miles per hour over posted limit, (2) DUI, and (3) DUI with BAC greater than .08. He 
pled guilty to DUI and was sentenced to one day in jail, ordered to pay a fine and court 
costs, ordered to obtain alcohol screening and have an interlock device installed on his 
vehicle, and was placed on probation. The remaining charges were dismissed. 
Applicant is no longer required to have the interlock on his car and is making monthly 
payments to pay down his fine. He promptly reported his DUI arrest to his Facility 
Security Officer, who made a follow-up report. (GE 2(I-16), GE 7, AE A, Tr. 38-42, 60-
61, 66-67.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Falsification of e-QIP 
 
 Applicant falsified his August 2008 e-QIP in four separate areas. When queried 
whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related to alcohol or 
drugs, he responded “no.” He deliberately failed to respond truthfully by not listing his 
drug and alcohol arrests and convictions, discussed supra. When queried whether he 
had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted with any offenses not listed in the last 
seven years, he responded “no.” He deliberately failed to respond truthfully by not listing 
his April 2006 charge for improper light on his license plate and driving with a 
suspended license for failure to appear and pay fines.  
 
When queried whether he had ever illegally used any controlled substance such 
as marijuana in the last seven years, he responded “no.” He deliberately failed to 
respond truthfully by not listing his marijuana use, discussed supra. When queried 
whether he had been over 180 days delinquent in the last seven years or was currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt, he answered “no.” He deliberately failed to 
respond truthfully by not listing 12 separate debts that were in a collection or past-due 
status. (Tr. 42-60.) 
 
 By way of explanation, Applicant stated, “I was so anxious to get the job and I 
was overwhelmed by getting accepted and getting to that point that I basically rushed 
through the e-QIP which I know was a mistake and I’m aware of that now but I was so 
excited to actually get a start on a positive aspect of my life that I just – I rushed through 
it.” (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s father testified on his behalf. He retired from the U.S. Army as a 
sergeant first class (E-7) after serving a 20-year career. Applicant’s father stated that 
the Applicant has matured significantly since graduating from high school. He opined 
the murder of his son’s friend in 1997 greatly impacted him causing him to focus on 
school and a career. He noted that his son is a “good dad,” who tries to do what is best 
for his children. His son is doing well at his current job and has received a number of 
“kudos” from his employer. Applicant attends church where his father is an ordained 
minister. (Tr. 75-81.) 
 
Applicant submitted four work-related reference letters. The collective sense of 
these reference letters is that the authors view Applicant as a good worker and as a 
valued and trusted employee. (AE E- H.) Applicant also submitted four certificates of 
achievement, a $500 bonus award, and a certification by education request. (AE I – M.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and its evidence all 
ten allegations alleged under this concern. The allegations covered a spectrum of 
misconduct spanning a ten-year period. Of particular concern are Applicant’s recent 
falsifications when completing his e-QIP.1
 
 The Government established through the 
evidence presented the disqualifying condition in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(c). 
Seven personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
                                                          
1 Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). 
Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential 
sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do no cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
I have reviewed the mitigating conditions under this concern and conclude none 
of them fully apply. Applicant’s drug involvement spanned a six-year period, which 
included his using marijuana two to three times a week during that time frame as well as 
incurring three separate criminal arrests or charges involving marijuana in 1998, 2001 
and 2004. His involvement with substance abuse was not limited to marijuana. Alcohol 
was also involved in his 2001 assault arrest and in his 2008 DUI arrest.  
 
In 2006, he was convicted of driving with improper light on license plate and 
driving on a suspended license for failure to appear or pay fines. In light of Applicant’s 
e-QIP falsifications, I am less inclined to accept his assertion that his last drug use 
occurred in 2004. The ongoing and repeated nature of his substance abuse history and 
lack corroborating evidence leaves me with doubt that Applicant’s substance abuse 
problems are truly behind him. 
 
More recent and serious are Applicant’s deliberate falsifications of his e-QIP. A 
statement is false when it is made deliberately, knowingly, and willfully. An omission of 
relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of his reportable conduct, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
including his drug and alcohol history as well as his financial problems, and chose not to 
disclose them. He certified his answers to be true and correct. Had Applicant’s 
information been relied upon without verification, he may well have been successfully 
vetted for a security clearance. Regardless of the reason Applicant chose not to be 
forthcoming, the process does not allow for applicants to pick and choose which 
questions they will answer correctly. When applicants lie on their security clearance 
applications, as Applicant did in this case, they seriously undermine the process.2
 
  
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s behavior is recent and 
not isolated. Considering his behavior, the nature and seriousness of his misconduct, 
his exercise of repeated poor judgment and other factors identified supra, I find his 
favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate Guideline E security concerns. His 
conduct raises questions about his ability and willingness to follow the law, and 
ultimately, to protect classified information. His conduct also raises serious doubts and 
questions about his judgment. Further time and additional evidence is needed before 
my concerns or doubts regarding Applicant’s questionable judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are satisfied. 
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
refute personal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the 
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support 
a favorable decision. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”3
 
 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
                                                          
2 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:   
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1a - 1j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
