1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-06697
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows a federal
agency denied Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information
(SCI) in 2004 based on a combination of several grounds as follows: drug involvement,
personal conduct, foreign influence and preference, and criminal conduct. Under
consideration here are some of the underlying factual bases for that denial decision.
During 2002–2004, while going through pre-employment processing with the other
federal agency, he made odd and troubling, if not inexplicable, statements that call into
question his current judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. He did not provide a
satisfactory explanation sufficient to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
statements. The other alleged matters, including the foreign influence and preference
matters, are resolved in his favor. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 3,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline E for personal conduct and Guideline C for foreign preference.
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. Department
Counsel then amended the SOR in December 2010, by adding an allegation under
Guideline B for foreign influence. This allegation, at SOR ¶ 3.a, like the Guideline C
allegation, simply cross-referenced certain matters alleged under Guideline E. Applicant
timely answered the amended SOR.  
 The case was assigned to me January 26, 2011. The hearing took place
February 23, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was received March 3, 2011. 
 
Without objections, the record was kept open until March 3, 2011, to allow
Department Counsel to present a request to take administrative or official notice of
certain facts about the country of Israel. Those materials were timely received, made
part of the record as Exhibit 12, and I have taken notice of the facts set forth in the
written request. Applicant was given an opportunity to respond to the request, but no
such response was received. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, as set forth below, are accepted
as findings of fact. The following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been married
and divorced twice. He married for the third time in 2004. He has no children of his own,
but his current wife has two adult children from a previous marriage; both children are
gainfully employed in the United States. He is seeking a security clearance for his job as
a training specialist or instructor, which he has held since July 2008. His wife, who
became a U.S. citizen in 2008, is similarly employed at the same location, except that
she recently began employment as a federal employee for a military department.
Applicant reports that she was granted a security clearance. 
 This statement serves as the sole basis for Guideline B and C matters. 2
 Tr. 45–47. 3
3
Applicant’s employment history includes military service in the U.S. Army. He
served during 1986–1990, during which time he was trained as a counterintelligence
agent. Thereafter, from about 1991 to 1998, he earned both a master’s degree and a
Ph.D. from a university’s department of Near Eastern studies. He is proficient in Arabic,
and he has studied Hebrew as well. 
Applicant worked as an assistant professor for a language school from 1999 to
2008. He worked chiefly as an Arabic language instructor, although he worked in other
areas of the school as well. He was employed continuously at the school except for a
five-month period in 2005, when his contract was not renewed. He resumed
employment with the school when another department offered him a contract. 
The SOR allegations arise from information Applicant provided during his
unsuccessful attempts to obtain employment, both as an employee and then a
contractor, with a federal agency during 2002–2004. During this time, he went through
an application and screening process, which included a polygraph examination on two
occasions. Concerning the SOR allegations under Guideline E, the evidence
establishes the following:
1. During a January 2002 interview with the federal agency, Applicant expressed
concerns about whether he would be able to work for an administration or mission that
was contrary to his moral values. During the same interview, he stated that he was
unsure if he could ever work for a Commander in Chief (i.e., the U.S. President) who did
not share his political and personal views. With explanation, Applicant admits making
this statement. 
2. During a June 2004 interview (not January 2002 as alleged) with the same
federal agency, Applicant stated that he had an affinity for Israel, and that if asked to
translate information that could result in adverse action against Israelis, he may be
tempted to omit or alter information to aid the Israeli people.  With explanation,2
Applicant admits making this statement.
3. During the same June 2004 interview, he reported that from January 2002 to
April 2002, while working at the language school, he often worked six hours daily, but
claimed eight hours daily. With explanation, Applicant admits this conduct.
4. Applicant married his current wife in 2004, when she was a foreign citizen, in
violation of the federal agency’s policy against association with foreign nationals. With
explanation, Applicant admits unknowingly or unintentionally violating this policy. 
In his hearing testimony, Applicant admitted making the statements noted above
in subparagraphs 1 and 2.  He claimed he did “not recognize the person who uttered3
 Tr. 46. 4
 Tr. 47. 5
 Tr. 72. 6
 Tr. 73. 7
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
the statements;”  he claimed to have no rational explanation for the statements; he4
claimed to be appalled at the thought of making the statements; he claimed to have no
recollection of actually uttering the words; and he claimed that:
So embarrassed am I now and so traumatized am I emotionally, mentally,
at the thought of the things that I said in that abnormal state of mind,
which is the only way that I can think to describe it, that I have simply
blotted it from my memory. So when I said, I don’t recall, I wasn’t - - I
didn’t mean to imply that there was any question that I had said it. [I] did
say it if the Government says I did it.5
In addition, Applicant attributed his statements to the fear and panic he experienced
during the polygraph examinations, especially so the first examination in 2002.  He6
claimed that, looking back, the situation was laughable, and he described himself as
“idiotically naive.”7
Also in his hearing testimony, Applicant denied any foreign preference, foreign
influence, or allegiance to any country over the United States. He explained that by
marrying his wife in 2004, he unknowingly or unintentionally violated a policy he had
agreed to follow as an applicant for employment with the federal agency.  
Applicant did not present any documentary evidence. Likewise, he did not
present the testimony of any witnesses other than his spouse and his own.  
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
5
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 6–8, and AG ¶¶ 9–11 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and mitigating19
conditions). 
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 20
 AG ¶ 15. 21
6
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
1. Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence
The foreign preference and foreign influence matters are discussed together
because they are based on the same factual matters; namely, Applicant’s statement in
2004, when he expressed an affinity for Israel. I have considered his statement, the
passage of time since he made the statement, his strong denial of any foreign
preference, foreign influence, or allegiance for any country other than the United States,
the nature of the foreign country as set forth in the administrative notice request, and
analyzed his statement under the concerns and conditions for Guidelines B and C.19
Although his statement still presents personal conduct concerns, which are discussed
below, it no longer poses undue foreign preference and foreign influence concerns.
Accordingly, Guidelines B and C are decided for Applicant. 
2. Personal Conduct
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be20
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  21
The first issue here is the security significance of two of the four matters alleged
under Guideline E. First, I attach no security significance to Applicant’s working fewer
hours than required during January–April 2002. Although his conduct was wrong and he
knew it was wrong, it does not rise to the level of disqualifying conduct that makes him
unsuitable for a security clearance. His conduct is dated, relatively minor, and not
 AG ¶ 17. 22
7
uncommon in the workplace. Second, I attach no security significance to Applicant’s
violation of the federal agency’s policy about associating with foreign nationals. He
provided a credible explanation that his violation of the policy was unknowing or
unintentional or both. 
The second issue here, and the apparent gravamen of the SOR, is the security
significance of the other two matters alleged under Guideline E. During 2002–2004,
while going through pre-employment processing with the other federal agency,
Applicant made odd and troubling, if not inexplicable, statements that call into question
his current judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. His statements (concerning the
Commander in Chief and affinity for Israel) raise serious doubts about his ability or
willingness to place the national security interests of the United States above his own
self-interests. Applicant is both an experienced and well-educated man, and he knew or
should have known the gravity of his statements. And under Guideline E, his odd and
troubling statements raise the following disqualifying conditions:
¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and 
¶ 16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
There are several mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline E.  I have22
given due consideration to them and I conclude that none apply in Applicant’s favor.
Granted, he made the statements several years ago, and he made the statements
under circumstances that are stressful to many people. But given the gravity of his
statements, they cannot be dismissed by the passage of time. The same goes for his
current disavowal of the statements. We have all said things we would like to take back,
but his claims, as described in the findings of fact, are simply dubious and cannot be
relied upon. This is especially so concerning his claim of no memory of making the 2002
statements. Applicant did not provide a satisfactory explanation sufficient to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the statements. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).23
8
To conclude, under Guideline E for personal conduct, the evidence as a whole
justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of
protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I relied in part on the
opportunity to listen to Applicant’s testimony and observe his demeanor during the
hearing. In addition, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and23
Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a(1): Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a(2): Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a(3): For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a(4): For Applicant
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
