 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 09-07574 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 9, 2009. On 
September 10, 2010,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
                                                          
1 The typewritten date on the SOR is September 1, 2010, but the document reflects a handwritten change 
to September 10, 2010. The record does not reflect the reason for the change or who made it. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 8, 2010; answered it on November 18, 
2010; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on November 24, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
February 1, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on February 3, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on February 14, 2011, scheduling it for March 8, 2011. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of one 
witness. I kept the record open until March 24, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence. At his telephonic request, I extended the deadline until March 
31, 2011. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A through E 
are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
March 16, 2011. The record closed on March 31, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f, 
1.i-1.k, 1.m, and 1.o-1.u. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.l, and 1.n. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old field mechanical technician employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since July 2008. He has worked for 
federal contractors since March 2005. He served in the U.S. Army from September 
1986 to June 1990 and received an honorable discharge. He has never held a security 
clearance. (Tr. 8.) 
 
 Applicant married in September 1986 and divorced in October 1993. He married 
again in July 1998 and divorced in November 2007. He has cohabited with a woman 
since September 2007. He has one adult child, born during his first marriage. He was 
obligated to pay child support, and he accumulated an arrearage of about $9,000, which 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u. 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in August 2009, he 
attributed his financial problems to a costly divorce in November 2007 and being out of 
work for six months after a serious automobile accident in January 2008. (GX 2 at 5.)  
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling more than $30,000. The four debts 
denied by Applicant total only about $382. Applicant submitted evidence showing that 
the $2,947 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is being paid by garnishment and the 
balance has been reduced to $1,190. (AX B.) He submitted evidence that the two 
judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.t have been paid in full. (AX A.) The $249 credit union 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m was paid in May 2008 (AX C.) He has been making 
payments on the child support arrearage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u, and he has reduced the 
balance from $9,000 to $2,659. (AX D.) The remaining debts are unpaid, the largest of 
which is a deficiency of $9,807 after an automobile repossession, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that his son paid the cable service debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.g, 1.h, and 1.l, but he provided no documentary evidence of payment. (Tr. 29-30.) He 
disputed the $42 telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, contending that he never had 
service with that provider. However, he submitted no evidence to show that he had 
contacted the creditor to dispute the debt or asked the credit reporting agencies to 
delete the debt from his credit reports. (Tr. 59; GX 2 at 7.) 
 
 At the hearing and in his post-hearing submission, Applicant stated that he was 
in the process of arranging credit counseling with his credit union and intended to 
consult with a financial specialist at his bank. (Tr. 49-50; AX E.) As of the date the 
record closed, there was no evidence that he had received any credit or financial 
counseling.  
 
 In July 2010, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in response to 
DOHA interrogatories. He reported gross monthly income of $1,350, expenses of $896, 
and debt payments of $200, including biweekly child support payments of $46. (GX 2 at 
15; AX D at 2.) He has a 15-year-old car but no car payments. (Tr. 62.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor is a retired Navy chief petty officer. He has known 
Applicant for three or four years. He testified that he regards Applicant as very 
dependable, depends on him heavily, and would like to promote him. (Tr. 69-71.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 debts totaling more than $30,000. Applicant admitted 17 
debts, of which five have been resolved or are being resolved by regular payments. All 
alleged debts are reflected on his credit reports.  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial history establishes two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). Thus, the burden shifted to him to rebut or 
explain the facts or mitigate the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts.  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and did not arise under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s loss of employment 
after his automobile accident and his divorce were conditions beyond his control. He 
paid the credit union debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m in May 2008, after his accident but 
before his divorce. Since his divorce, he has paid about two-thirds of the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, fully satisfied the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.t, and 
reduced his child support arrearage from $9,000 to $2,659. The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b 
is being paid by garnishment, which is not necessarily mitigating. See ISCR Case No. 
08-06059 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). However, he has acted responsibly regarding 
the two of the three judgments against him, the credit union debt, and his child support 
arrearage. He has taken no actions and has no plan to resolve the other debts alleged 
in the SOR. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is established only for the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.m, 1.t, and 1.u, but not for the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not yet received 
counseling and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
 
6 
 
 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). The judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is being paid by garnishment, which does not demonstrate good 
faith. However, Applicant has voluntarily resolved or is resolving the four delinquent 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.m, 1.t, and 1.u. He has no specific plan and has taken 
no actions to resolve the remaining delinquent debts. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) 
is established only for the four debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.m, 1.t, and 1.u. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
has denied the $42 telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but he has done nothing to 
resolve the dispute. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked for federal contractors for six years. 
He has earned the respect and support of his supervisor, a retired Navy chief petty 
officer. He has resolved or is resolving five of his six largest debts. He is living modestly. 
He was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. On the other hand, he has not 
sought or received counseling and has no clear plan for resolving his remaining debts, 
including the deficiency of $9,807 from the automobile repossession. He has good 
intentions, but he has not yet established a track record of financial responsibility.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.u:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
