 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06481 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Although Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal 
conduct, he failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2011. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 24, 2011, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on February 17, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called five witnesses, and 
submitted exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 25, 2011.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Applicant did not 
object and the request was approved. The request and the attached documents were 
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as HE II. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old software engineer for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for the same company since 2006. He was born in the Taiwan in 1994, came to 
the United States when he was three years old, and has lived here since. He was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 1999. He has a master’s degree. He currently holds a 
security clearance. He married his wife in June 2010.1 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen of the PRC.2 She is 24 years old. She moved to the 
United States eight months before Applicant’s hearing. Before moving here, she resided 
in the PRC. She was a member of the Communist Party while she lived in the PRC until 
she resigned in October 2009. She joined the party for career enhancement purposes 
when she was in college. She was declared ineligible for permanent residency status by 
the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service because of her communist party 
membership. After her resignation from the Communist Party was transmitted to the 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service, she was issued a green card. She last visited 
the PRC two weeks before Applicant’s hearing. He accompanied her on that visit. The 
purpose of the trip was to spend time with her family during the Chinese New Year 
holiday. In the future, she plans on visiting China every two years.3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are both citizens and residents of the 
PRC. Neither are members of the Communist Party. Applicant has minimum contact 
with his wife’s parents. He chatted with them, using a computer phone service, a 
“handful” of times since his wife came to the United States. His wife initially contacted 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 7; GE 1, 4; Answer to SOR (Answer). 
 
2 SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i refer to Applicant’s fiancé, who is now his wife. 
 
3 Tr. at 65-72, 85; GE 3 (p. F71); AE B; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
her parents every day using the computer phone service. More recently, her telephone 
contact with her parents has been about once a month.4  
 
 Applicant’s wife has an uncle, aunt, and cousin who are citizens of and reside in 
the PRC. All three are members of the Communist Party. Her aunt had a position with 
the district government where she resides. She recently retired from that position. Her 
uncle is an airport administrator for the district and a higher ranking official in the 
Communist Party then his wife. Her cousin is a speechwriter for a local official. 
Applicant has met all three relatives. On one occasion, upon Applicant’s arrival in China, 
he was met at the airport by the uncle and aunt. They asked him questions about his job 
to the point that Applicant felt uncomfortable about answering their questions and 
decided to remain silent.5  
 
 Applicant traveled to the PRC the four times alleged in the SOR (July 2008, 
December 2008, May 2009, December 2009). The first trip was with his bible study 
group. The purpose of the trip was to teach English to Chinese children. He first met his 
wife-to-be when he was on this trip. His second trip was with his brother and a friend. 
The purpose was to visit his wife-to-be and let his brother and friend meet her. The third 
trip was when Applicant proposed to his wife-to-be and attend her college graduation. 
The fourth trip allowed him to assist her as she sought a visa to come to the United 
States. Additionally, Applicant returned to the PRC in January and February 2011 to 
spend the Chinese New Year celebration with his wife’s family.6 
 
 In September 2008, upon learning of Applicant’s contacts with his girlfriend 
(future wife) and her family members, the company’s security manager advised 
Applicant about refraining from discussions about work. Additionally, Applicant was 
specifically advised that he might want to sever his relationship with his girlfriend to 
maintain his security clearance. Applicant indicated that he had no intentions of 
severing his relationship.7 
 
 Applicant admitted that he made a number of acquaintances who are citizens 
and residents of China on his trips there. They do not keep in close contact and he may 
only hear from them once or twice a year. He has extensively reported all of his 
contacts to his company’s security representative.8 
 
 Applicant’s sister, who is a U.S. citizen, is a teacher who taught in South Korea, 
but she no longer teaches there. She is currently teaching English in Saudi Arabia.9  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 91-92; GE 1; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 88, 91, 93; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 74, 90; GE 3; Answer. 
 
7 GE 3 at p. F63. 
 
8 GE 1, 3; Answer 
 
9 Answer. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant had three security incidents between April 2007 and December 2008. 
None of the incidents resulted in the compromise of classified information. The first 
incident occurred in April 2007, when he inadvertently brought his cell phone inside a 
sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF). He recognized that the cell phone 
was in his pocket when he initially sat down to start work for the day and immediately 
left the SCIF and reported his actions. The second incident occurred in June 2007, 
when he failed to secure a safe in his office as he departed the facility. In response to 
this incident, he set up a reminder system to check the safe before he departed for the 
day. The last incident occurred in December 2008, when he used a classified computer 
for a software test but failed to log-off the computer when he left work for the day. An 
automatic screen saver activated within a few minutes to lock the computer so there 
was no compromise. He was required to complete a security checklist every day for 30 
days before leaving work because of his actions. He was given training after each 
incident and he has not had a security incident since then. No disciplinary actions 
resulted from any of these incidents because management considered them minor.10 
 
 Four witnesses from Applicant’s company testified favorably for him. All were of 
the opinion that he was an outstanding worker with high integrity. They all 
recommended that he should be granted a security clearance. His performance 
evaluations from 2007 through February 2011 show an overall rating of “far exceeds 
expectations” or “exceeds expectations.” He is viewed as a top-notch employee by his 
company.11 
 
People’s Republic of China   
 
 The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. The PRC has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive countries in targeting sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology, and economic intelligence. It has targeted the U.S. with 
active intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. In China, authorities have 
monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, 
and internet communications. Authorities opened and censored mail. The security 
services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to 
computers, telephones, and fax machines. All major hotels had a sizable internal 
security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and searched for 
sensitive or proprietary materials. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. at 38-43; 94; GE 1; Answer. 
 
11 Tr. at 33-64; AE G. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of the PRC. She has lived in the United States less 
than one year. She was a member of the Communist Party until 2009. Her parents are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. Her uncle, aunt, and cousin are citizens and reside in 
the PRC, and are members of the Communist Party. China is a communist country with 
a poor human rights record. It is one of the world’s most aggressive nations in the 
collection of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic information. Applicant’s wife 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, 
and coercion. She also creates a potential conflict of interest. Applicant made several 
acquaintances with citizens and residents of China during his many visits there. 
Applicant’s foreign connections create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been 
 
7 
 
raised by the evidence. Applicant’s sister is no longer residing in South Korea, thus 
alleviating any heightened risk of potential conflict of interest. SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved in 
Applicant’s favor.    
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant is clearly a loyal U.S. citizen with no allegiance to the government of 
China. However, he is in a difficult position because his wife of less than one year is a 
citizen of China, and former member of the Communist Party. Her parents still live in 
China and her uncle, aunt, and cousin not only live in China, but are active members of 
the Communist Party. They even queried Applicant about his job on one occasion. His 
frequent trips to China, including his most recent trip in January and February 2011, 
indicate his close ties to his wife’s family. Although Applicant has longstanding ties to 
the United States and has fully met his reporting requirements concerning his foreign 
contacts, his wife has almost no ties to this country. As stated above, the protection of 
the national security is the paramount consideration and any doubt must be resolved in 
favor of national security. Doubts remain about Applicant’s wife. Because of Applicant’s 
close ties to his wife and the nature of the government of China, I am unable to find any 
 
8 
 
of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.j. AG ¶ 8(b) 
partially applies because of Applicant’s long-standing loyalties in the United States. AG 
¶ 8(e) applies because Applicant reported his foreign contacts. Additionally, AG ¶ 8(c) 
applies to the acquaintances he made, outside of his wife’s family, while traveling in 
China. Despite the presence of some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the 
significant security concerns generated by Applicant’s Chinese wife and her family.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 Applicant’s three security incidents are covered under Guideline K, Handling 
Protected Information. The Government did not allege his conduct under that guideline, 
but proceeded under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant’s conduct was 
inadvertent in all three cases and was promptly reported when discovered by him. 
There was no compromise of protected information. Applicant was trained after each 
incident and responded by creating techniques for future use to avoid duplicating his 
errors. No further incidents have happened in over two years. Applicant’s actions in 
response to these incidents reflect good judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, 
 
9 
 
and a willingness to comply with rules. Additionally, any vulnerability to his personal 
standing created by his actions was remedied by his follow-up actions after each 
incident. The record contains insufficient evidence to support application of AG ¶¶ 16(d) 
and (e) in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant’s wife has been in this country for less than one year. She is a citizen 
of China and a former member of the Communist Party. She has strong ties to her 
family in China, including family members who are Communist Party members. 
Applicant has visited China five times since 2008. On one visit he was asked about his 
job by his wife’s family who are Communist Party members. The PRC has an 
authoritarian government, a bad human rights record, and has a very aggressive 
espionage program aimed at the United States The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. There is no reason to question Applicant’s loyalty 
and devotion to this country. However, he has not overcome the vulnerability to 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, and duress created by his foreign wife.  
 
 I considered all of Applicant’s very favorable character evidence. He is a valued 
and trusted employee. He has done nothing whatsoever to question his loyalty and 
devotion to this country. However, he has simply been unable to overcome the “very 
heavy burden” of showing that he, his wife, or her family members in the PRC are not 
 
10 
 
subject to influence by that country.12 His vulnerability to foreign pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress remains a concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. The 
Government failed to establish substantial evidence supporting the allegations under 
personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007). 
