 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00079 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline D, Sexual 
Behavior and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2010. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 24, 2011, with a hearing date of February 
17, 2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, and 
offered one exhibit (AE) A. It was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 25, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all the Guideline D allegations (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.e), but admitted all the Guideline E allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e). After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 68 years old. He has been married for 41 years. He has two adult 
children. He retired from working for a defense contractor in January 2011. He is 
seeking his security clearance to continue working for the same defense contractor as a 
consultant. He works as a systems engineer. He is a high school graduate with some 
college credits. He has no military service. He does not currently hold a security 
clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) purchasing a pornographic 
magazine depicting teenagers in 1991 engaged in sexual acts or nudity; searching the 
internet for child pornography once a week from 1995 until 2000; storing pictures of 
child pornography on his computer’s hard drive from 1995 until 2000; searching the 
internet for nudist colonies and downloading pictures of naked children as young as two 
years old, receiving emails with pictures of child pornography for about 10 years through 
July 2003 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e); (2) being denied access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI) by a government agency in 2003; having his access to SCI and 
eligibility for a top secret clearance revoked by a government agency in 2005; his wife’s 
lack of knowledge of his denial of and revocation of SCI access and top secret eligibility, 
and the reasons for such denial or revocation. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e) 
  
 In January 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a government agency in 
connection with his security clearance access. During that interview, he admitted to 
purchasing a pornographic magazine at a sex shop in 1991 while in Germany. He 
further stated that the magazine depicted teenagers from ages 13-18 engaged in sex 
acts or posing nude. Applicant later stated that the magazine was purchased in the 
Netherlands. He also stated that he recently (before January 2003) used his home 
computer to search for nudist colonies on the internet. From this search he downloaded 
approximately 24-36 images of naked nudists, including some pictures of children as 
young as two years old. He disputed the characterization of his internet nudist colonies 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 7, 36, 38-39; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
search. He stated that he was searching for beach resorts and a “pop up” link directed 
him to the nudist colony site.2 
 
 Applicant was re-interviewed by the same government agency in August 2003. 
During this interview, the term child pornography was defined and explained to him. 
With this in mind, he disclosed to the interviewer that between 1995 and 2000, he used 
his computer and the internet to view child pornography on a weekly basis. He would 
seek out these pictures by visiting “news group sites”. The particular news group sites 
that he sought out shared various types of pornography including child pornography. He 
collected and stored child pornography pictures on his computer’s hard drive. He 
stopped collecting these pictures and removed them from his computer in 2000 
because he was concerned about child pornography laws. He also stated that he still 
was receiving child pornography one or two times a month through emails. He has 
received these emails for ten years, the last one was in July 2003. The last one included 
an image of a boy and girl approximately six to seven years old, posed in a sexually 
explicit fashion.3 
 
 Applicant, through his answer to the SOR and his testimony at hearing, denies 
his intentional involvement with child pornography. He also asserts that the narrative 
summaries of his two interviews by the government agency were inaccurate.4  
 
 Based upon the information provided by the Applicant during his two interviews in 
January and August 2003, as discussed above, a government agency denied him 
access to SCI in September 2003. Another government agency revoked his access to 
SCI and his top secret eligibility in April 2005. Applicant’s wife is unaware of the denial 
or revocation actions or the reason for those actions.5   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                                          
2 GE 2 at I-31, I-32, I-33.  
 
3 GE 2 at I-35, I-37, I-39. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-30; GE 2 at I-36, I-38, GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 40; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 
5 
 
 
I have considered all of the Sexual Behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
13 and especially considered the following: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and, 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 Applicant admitted to viewing child pornography over an extended period of time 
(1995-2000) and storing images on his computer’s hard drive. He received emails 
through 2003 that contained links to child pornographic images. In 2002, he conducted 
internet searches that led him to child pornographic sites. He also bought a magazine in 
1991 containing nude images of teenagers. After his interviews with a government 
agency, he essentially recanted his earlier admissions and claimed that the reports 
memorializing his interviews were not accurate. After reviewing the reports and 
considering the detailed facts that are referred to in those reports and the 
contemporaneous nature of the interviews, I conclude that they accurately reflect 
Applicant’s admissions at the time and are more persuasive then Applicant’s after-the-
fact minimizations and retractions. Possessing or viewing child pornography is a 
criminal offense. Child pornography, possession or viewing, by its very nature, causes 
the possessor to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. It is especially true 
here where Applicant has never revealed his actions to his wife of 41 years. Any activity 
involving possessing or viewing child pornography reflects a lack of judgment.  AG ¶¶ 
13(a), 13(c), and 13(d) all apply. 
I have considered all of the Sexual Behavior mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14 
and especially considered:  
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and,  
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Although Applicant’s last admitted use of child pornography was in 2003, the 
number of times he possessed and viewed this material over an extended period of time 
(1995-2003) does not support the conclusion that the behavior is unlikely to recur. 
Moreover, his actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. 
 
6 
 
 
Because his wife remains unaware of his involvement with child pornography, his 
behavior serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and (c) do 
not apply. Since viewing or possessing child pornography is a crime itself regardless if it 
is done privately and discretely, the applicability of AG ¶ 14(d) is irrelevant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Although the Guideline E allegations, ¶¶ 2.a – 2.c, are framed in terms of 
Applicant’s denial or revocation of his SCI access and top secret eligibility by 
government agencies in 2003 and 2005, the underlying factual basis for each allegation 
is Applicant’s involvement with child pornography. Therefore, the previous analysis 
under AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d) also applies here. Additionally, Applicant’s conduct 
of viewing child pornography over an eight year time-frame created a vulnerability to his 
personal standing. This vulnerability was compounded by Applicant’s failure to disclose 
his child pornographic involvement and his reasons for such involvement to his wife. AG 
¶ 16(e) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 (f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
  Viewing or possessing child pornography is a federal criminal offense and 
therefore not minor. Applicant’s actions were not infrequent and are not unlikely to 
recur. They also cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant did not acknowledge his behavior; rather he minimized his actions after his 
initial disclosures. No evidence was produced by Applicant regarding the reasons he 
engaged in obtaining child pornography. Applicant’s decision not to inform his wife of his 
involvement with child pornography continues to make him vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Applicant questioned the reliability of the government agency’s 
summarized interviews; however, the information contained in those interviews was 
detailed and contemporaneous. It was reliable and persuasive. None of the above 
mitigating factors apply here.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
his company. I also considered the seriousness of his child pornography activity. 
Applicant’s actions were violations of federal law. Based upon the number of admitted 
child pornographic events, I conclude Applicant engaged in this activity on a regular 
basis. Applicant did not meet his burden to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline D, 
Sexual Behavior, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
