                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06834 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 3, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 19, 2010. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On January 7, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on January 12, 2011. He received it on February 1, 2011. He was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on February 28, 2011, within the 30-day time 
allowed that would have expired on March 3, 2011. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the documents. They are marked as the FORM Response. I received the 
case assignment on March 13, 2011. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraph 1.a and admitted the other 
three allegations with explanations. His admissions are incorporated into these 
Findings. (Items 2)  
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He married in 1970 and divorced in 1992. He had four 
children, two of whom are deceased. He worked as a physicist for the federal 
government until his retirement in 2003. He started his federal employment in 1977. 
Applicant has a Ph.D. in physics from a major university. He now works as a research 
associate for a university. (Items 4 and 5)  
 
Applicant consumed alcohol from 1965 to at least April 2009. At times he drank 
to excess resulting in intoxication. Applicant admitted the starting date was 1968, not 
1965 as contained in his personal subject interview with the government investigator on 
June 26, 2009. He informed the investigator he did not drink alcohol from 1966 to 1970. 
He also denied drinking to excess and intoxication. Applicant started drinking only beer 
every two weeks with friends. When employed by the government he drank once or 
twice a month with co-workers, having two or three glasses of beer each time. His 
drinking increased to four pints of beer four times a week in 1999. The consumption of 
that quantity of beer would intoxicate Applicant, by his own admission. After that year 
Applicant realized he had a drinking problem and on several occasions ceased 
consuming alcohol “on many occasions.” He would do things while intoxicated that he 
would not normally do, such as smoking cigarettes and slurring his speech. (Items 4 
and 6)  
 
Applicant was arrested in October 1996 for driving under the influence of liquor 
and driving when his blood alcohol content was more than .10% (DUI). Applicant denied 
consuming alcohol for three years after that arrest. He asserted he did not use alcohol 
from June to November 2010 in his Answer. (Items 4 and 6) 
 
From December 2000 until at least December 2009 Applicant received treatment 
for alcohol abuse from a medical professional, a psychiatrist. Applicant’s son died in 
January 2003 and he experienced anxiety and sleeplessness. At that time he consulted 
with the psychiatrist, not in 2000, which was an estimated date Applicant put on his SF-
 
 
 
 
 
3
86.  During that treatment he took the medication Antabuse concurrent with his 
treatment program.  Applicant ceased using Antabuse and resumed drinking alcohol, 
sometimes to excess, from March 2004 to at least April 2009. Applicant’s SOR Answer 
stated “my present complete adherence to Antabuse is evidence of my abstinence from 
alcohol.” Applicant also stated in his Answer that, “I am resolved to continue my 
abstinence from alcohol throughout the future.” He also stated, “I seldom consumed 
alcohol and very rarely to the point of intoxication.” Applicant claimed he does not need 
Antabuse to refrain from consuming alcohol. He asserted his pattern of abstinence is 
“beyond the requirement of responsible use as required of an alcohol abuser.” This 
statement admitted Applicant is an alcohol abuser. (Items 4, 6, and 7) 
 
Applicant submitted a 30-page curriculum vitae (CV) showing his numerous 
professional publications and presentations. His work history is delineated in the CV. He 
seeks a security clearance to allow him access to classified materials for a project with 
a federal department research team located at his university. Applicant submitted in his 
FORM Response his college transcripts that documented high grades in almost all his 
subjects. Applicant is an intelligent and educated person with a lengthy work history and 
many publications in the field of physics. (Items 4 and 7, FORM Response) 
 
 Applicant submitted a December 21, 2009 alcohol evaluation prepared by his 
psychiatrist. He has treated Applicant since March 12, 2004. The doctor reports that 
when Applicant stops taking Antabuse and tries to drink moderately, within a few weeks 
he begins drinking excessively. Those drinking periods last from a few days to a several 
weeks. Then Applicant renews his commitment to sobriety and resumes taking 
Antabuse. The doctor reported he is aware of only one DUI incident in 1996. He 
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol abuse (intermittent). The prognosis is unclear, though 
the doctor cited the best-known study showing 70% of persons diagnosed with alcohol 
abuse were stable or improved four years later. The remaining 30% worsened and met 
criteria for alcohol dependence. The doctor stated Applicant acknowledged he cannot 
drink moderately and excessive alcohol consumption adversely affects his life. 
Applicant’s openness and awareness of his problem shows progress in treatment and 
“connotes a more favorable prognosis than denial.” Applicant can use Antabuse 
successfully and this is a positive prognostic factor also. (Item 7) 
 
 Applicant submitted an updated alcohol evaluation by the same psychiatrist 
dated February 27, 2010. Applicant’s cover sheet referring to this evaluation stated the 
date is February 27, 2011, which would be accurate when compared to the contents of 
the report. The psychiatrist reported Applicant has been completely abstinent from 
alcohol since June 18, 2010, based on Applicant’s statements to him. Applicant has 
taken Antabuse in the amount of 125 mg since then. The psychiatrist examined 
pharmacy records that show Applicant obtained Antabuse regularly in the proper 
quantities. The psychiatrist met with Applicant three times since June 18, 2010. During 
those sessions Applicant stated he intended to remain abstinent for a long term. 
Applicant’s self-reporting is regarded credibly by the psychiatrist based on the honesty 
 
 
 
 
 
4
demonstrated over the seven years of their consultations. The psychiatrist is “very 
optimistic regarding his prognosis.” (Response to FORM) 
 
    Applicant did not submit any documentation from his psychiatrist for the period 
from February 2010 until October 29, 2010, when the SOR was issued discussing his 
use of Antabuse and his current consumption of alcohol. He provided no evidence 
concerning the quality of his job performance. He submitted no character references or 
other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating the applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating the applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
 
 
 
5
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Four conditions apply: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 Applicant has one driving under the influence of alcohol which occurred in 1996. 
AG ¶ 22 (a) applies. 
 Applicant has a history of habitual excessive alcohol consumption dating from at 
least 1965. His use varied over the years. After 2000 it became more frequent and the 
amount of beer consumed was four pints each night during the week. Applicant 
admitted to the government investigator during his background investigation that when 
intoxicated he would do things he would not normally do. AG ¶ 22 (c) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 Applicant submitted a diagnosis by his own physician/psychiatrist that he is an 
intermittent alcohol abuser. AG ¶ 22 (d) applies. 
 Applicant uses Antabuse to help him stop drinking alcohol. He has used it since 
at least 2000. Applicant has used Antabuse periodically over the past decade as he 
tries to drink moderately. His psychiatrist reports in 2009 that Applicant is unsuccessful 
in those endeavors and returns to excessive drinking within a short period of time. 
Applicant is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser. Therefore, AG ¶ 22 (f) applies. 
 AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions apply: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 The only and last driving incident involving alcohol was 14 years ago. That is not 
a factor here and the mitigating condition AG ¶ 23 (a) would apply to alcohol-related 
incidents away from work. Applicant’s drinking is ongoing, so this same mitigating 
condition would not apply to the overall alcohol consumption security concern. 
Applicant’s sobriety periods are not “so infrequent” to elude concern, so again the 
mitigating condition would not apply to them. Applicant’s repeated relapses and returns 
to alcohol consumption cast doubt on his judgment. His psychiatrist now reports 
Applicant has been abstinent since June 2010. This period of time is short compared to 
his long history of alcohol abuse. His work reliability does not seem to be a problem 
based on the evidence in the file. In summary, this mitigating condition has partial 
applicability to specific components of Applicant’s continuing relationship with alcohol.  
 Applicant admits he has an alcohol abuse problem, as does his psychiatrist. He 
presented evidence his use of Antabuse is an attempt to overcome and control the 
 
 
 
 
 
7
situation. Applicant’s pattern of responsible use is unclear before 2009. After June 2010 
his psychiatrist reports Applicant has been abstinent from alcohol consumption, and he 
believes Applicant based on their seven-year history of consultations. Applicant 
periodically stopped his Antabuse program on his own volition and attempted to drink 
moderately, only to return to drinking excessively followed by a resumption of Antabuse. 
This pattern makes it clear Applicant has limited control over his need for alcohol. His 
current abstinence is a positive step but of short duration and suspect based on his past 
history. This changing pattern is one likely to continue for the remainder of Applicant’s 
life based on his past practice. His current abstinence is more than the responsible use 
contemplated by the guideline for alcohol abusers and is a favorable sign that Applicant 
is trying to control his alcohol consumption based on the recognition he cannot control 
his alcohol intake except through the use of Antabuse and abstinence. Therefore, AG ¶ 
23 (b) is applicable. 
 Applicant continues with his self-initiated medical consultations, dating from 
2004. His outpatient counseling is not complete but must be ongoing based on his 
psychiatrist’s 2009 and 2010 reports. Applicant’s past voluntary discontinuances from 
Antabuse and return to the medication periodically shows there was no successful 
completion of the out-patient counseling until his June 2010 abstinence and return to 
consistent use of Antabuse. These actions were taken before the SOR was issued in 
October 2010. Applicant’s relationship with alcohol for the foreseeable future is 
abstinence and Antabuse use. AG ¶ 23 (d) applies.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he started 
 
 
 
 
 
8
drinking to excess after 2000. The factors in his favor are that Applicant sought 
professional assistance when he recognized he had an alcohol problem. Applicant 
continues to consult with that psychiatrist to the present about his alcohol problem. The 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress is minimal because Applicant 
consults a psychiatrist about his problem and his drinking is obvious to his family and 
friends. Other than one DUI in 1996 there have not been any other alcohol incidents in 
Applicant’s history to indicate he violates the state and local driving laws. The 
psychiatrist’s prognosis is generally good based on the positive factors stated in his 
2009 and 2010 evaluations. Applicant is working on his alcohol problem with 
professional assistance and has it under control. 
 
Detrimental factors are that Applicant has an alcohol problem. Applicant’s 
consumption of alcohol is ongoing over the years, interrupted by his attempts to stop the 
consumption through the use of Antabuse. There have been no permanent behavioral 
changes regarding alcohol consumption by Applicant until June 2010 when he claims 
abstinence and regular Antabuse use. He has some control over his alcohol use, 
evidenced by his on-again, off-again drinking and Antabuse use. Based on his past 
drinking pattern, Applicant will continue to drink alcohol periodically, starting with 
moderate consumption and proceeding quickly to drinking excessively, if his 
commitment to abstinence and Antabuse use falters.  
 
Overall, the record evidence shows Applicant is working on his alcohol problem. 
His evidence, particularly the psychiatrist’s statements, leaves me without questions or 
substantial doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Alcohol Consumption. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:      For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
