 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01086 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2010, and again on September 25, 
2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
to another administrative judge on February 1, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on February 23, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 8, 2011. 
 
2 
 
Applicant did not appear for the hearing, and the case was continued. The case was 
reassigned to me on March 18, 2011. DOHA issued a second notice of hearing on 
March 28, 2011. On April 6, 2011, Applicant requested to change his request from a 
hearing to a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel’s 
request to proceed with a hearing was approved. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 20, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any documentary 
evidence. The record was held open until May 6, 2011, for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence before the 
record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 28, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2009. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He is a high school graduate. He is married with two children, ages 14 and 
12.1 
  
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts with balances totaling about $34,416, 
and that Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and his debts were discharged in 2001. 
Applicant admitted all the allegations.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems leading to his bankruptcy to not 
earning enough money. He had a family with two young children and could not pay all 
his debts. He worked for a company from 1996 to 2007, and his finances stabilized after 
the bankruptcy. Applicant was laid off in October 2007, when his job was outsourced. 
He had the option to remain with a new employer, but at a greatly reduced salary, or he 
could accept a severance package of one week’s pay for every year he was with the 
company. He chose the severance package. Applicant was unemployed until he was 
hired by his current employer in March 2009. He received unemployment 
compensation, and he cashed in his 401(k) retirement account, but he was unable to 
pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.2   
 
 Applicant received a loan modification on his primary mortgage and is not behind 
on those payments. He has not made any payments on the three debts alleged in the 
SOR, including $19,802 owed on a charged-off home equity loan. He stated he is 
paying his current debts, but admitted that he had not made the monthly payments on a 
credit union line of credit since about August 2010. A January 2011 credit report listed 
the account as $510 past due, with a balance of $4,295. He stopped paying the debt 
while he and his wife were separated. They have since reconciled. He has received 
some financial counseling. Applicant is unable to address his delinquent debts at this 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-23, 28-31; GE 1-3.  
 
 
3 
 
time. He stated that he plans to pay them, but he is uncertain when he will be able to do 
so.3  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 22-24, 31-41; GE 2, 3. Any debt that was not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. It will be used in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems leading to his bankruptcy to not 
earning enough money. His finances recovered after the bankruptcy until he lost his job 
in October 2007. He was unemployed until he was hired by his current employer in 
March 2009. He was separated from his wife for a period, which also exacerbated his 
financial problems. His unemployment and marital separation qualify as conditions that 
were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has been employed for more than two years, but he 
has done nothing of significance to address his delinquent debts. In fact, his credit union 
line of credit became delinquent after he returned to work. There is insufficient evidence 
for a determination that Applicant acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to 
repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. He received some financial counseling, 
but his finances are not under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am 
unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 
20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. In sum, I find 
that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s finances suffered when he was unemployed for an extended period. 
He returned to work more than two years ago, but his finances are still in disarray, 
without any resolution in the foreseeable future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
