1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-00723
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I grant Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on January 26, 2009. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on July 26, 2010, detailing security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations, that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny him
a security clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; Tr. 20.2
2
For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on July 28, 2010. He answered the SOR in writing
on August 10, 2010 and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA
received the request on August 16, 2010, and Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on January 24, 2011. I received the case assignment on February 1, 2011.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 23, 2011, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on March 8, 2011. The Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through
GE 11, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified. He did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on
March 14, 2011. I held the record open until April 8, 2011, for Applicant to submit
additional matters. Applicant did not submit any additional documents. The record
closed on April 8, 2011.
Procedural Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice less than 15 days before the hearing. I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the notice 15
days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15-day notice.
(Tr. 9.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation in ¶ 1.c of the
SOR. His admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. He denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b of the SOR.  After a complete and thorough review of the1
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 37 years old, works as a tester for a Department of Defense
contractor. He began this job in September 2008.2
GE 1; Tr. 19.3
GE 2; Tr. 21, 49-51.4
GE 4-GE 11; Tr. 31-34.5
3
Applicant was born in Mexico and immigrated to the United States in 1990. He
completed his general equivalency diploma (GED), and he became a U.S. citizen in
2008. He married in 1994. He and his wife have four children, who are 16, 13 (twins),
and 10.3
From 1997 until 2006, Applicant worked in the restaurant industry as a cook. In
2006, he began working as a realtor. He earned a good income, which lead to a
decision to purchase an investment house in 2006. He purchased a house for
approximately $169,000, and his monthly mortgage payment was $1,800 a month. He
rented the house until late 2007, when his tenants notified him that they could no longer
pay the rent and moved.  He was unable to find new tenants who could pay the $1,400
a month rent.4
About this same time, Applicant’s income started decreasing quickly because
real estate sales seriously declined. As a result, he stopped making his mortgage
payment on the rental property. With the mortgagee’s agreement, Applicant tried to sell
his house through a short sale, but was unsuccessful. The mortgagee foreclosed on his
loan in 2008, took possession of the house, and sold the house. The mortgagee has not
provided Applicant with any documents, which indicate the sales price of the property,
the total amount of his debt prior to the sale of the property, and any balance owed
following the sale of the property. Applicant has not received any documents from the
court, indicating a judicial foreclosure sale. The only source of information on this
property is Applicant’s credit reports, which reflect a debt of $240,000, (This is
substantially higher than his mortgage), and a past-due amount of $28,970. The
December 9, 2009 and February 2, 2010 credit reports contain a credit profile on
Applicant. Each profile identifies his mortgagee and indicates a past-due balance of
$28,970 in September 2008. (GE 8, p. 10; GE 9, p. 5) The February 20, 2009 credit
report indicates that the mortgagee reclaimed this property in December 2008 to settle
the defaulted mortgage. Applicant has not been in contact with the mortgagee since it
foreclosed on his property. He attempted to locate information on the mortgagee on the
internet, but could not find any contact information. He did not know that the credit
reports contained an address and telephone number for the mortgagee. He seemed
reluctant to contact this creditor, since he had not received any letters from the
mortgagee, advising that he owed money on his mortgage.5
Applicant attempted to find real estate clients during 2008, but with the decline in
the housing market, he could not. He collected $240 a week in unemployment benefits
because he did not earn any income as a realtor. With his months of unemployment and
lost income, he fell behind in paying his bills. Once he returned to work, he worked
towards the resolution of his outstanding debts. He resolved $6,656 past-due credit card
GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 30, 37-41.6
GE 11; Tr. 23-24.7
I requested Applicant to provide updated information on his income and expenses, but he did not submit this8
information. Tr. 60-61.
GE 4-GE 11.9
Tr. 36.10
4
debt and a $561 credit card debt. He recently negotiated a settlement on two past-due
debts in his wife’s name. He also negotiated a debt reduction plan on a credit card, in
which the creditor agreed not to charge him interest on his account provided he paid
$82 a month on his debt. He is paying this debt monthly.6
  
Applicant paid the August 2008 $295 medical bill in SOR allegation 1.b. He
indicated that he established a payment plan for the September 2008 $578 medical bill
in SOR allegation 1.a. He stated that he paid this bill, which is not listed on the January
24, 2011 credit report, but did not provide documentation verifying his payment. Given
his history of resolving past-due debts, I find this debt has been paid.7
Applicant indicated that his household income had increased since he prepared
his personal financial statement in March 2010. He estimated his current net monthly
income at $2,400-$2,500 and his wife’s current net monthly income at $1,800. His net
monthly income has increased by approximately $400 to $500. Certain monthly
expenses have declined because he cancelled his satellite dish and cable services. He
did some repairs in his house, which reduced his electric bill by $100 a month. One
small loan was paid in full in March 2011 and two other monthly credit card payments
will be resolved by summer. His monthly expenses total approximately $2,700.   A8
review of the  eight credit reports of record revealed that Applicant pays his bills as
required and did so before the economic downturn. The above mortgage foreclosure
debt is the only major financial issue for him.9
Applicant has not obtained financial counseling, nor has he retained the services
of a debt consolidation firm. He chose to pay his past-due debts on his own. Since
beginning his current position, his finances have improved and enabled him to pay his
debts.10
State Anti-Deficiency Law
The state in which Applicant resides and purchased his rental property has two
anti-deficiency statutes: State Law § 33-729(A) and § 33-814(G).
State law § 33-729(A) provides:
As of September 20, 2009, state law requires the trustor under a deed of trust to “utilize” the property for six11
consecutive months and provide a certificate of occupancy. This amendment to the law took effect months
after the foreclosure on Applicant’s property.
5
If a mortgage is given to secure the payment of the balance of the
purchase price, or to secure a loan to pay all or part of the purchase price,
of a parcel of real property of two and one-half acres of less which is
limited to and utilized for either a single on-family or single two-family
dwelling. . . [there shall be no deficiency judgment]
And State law § 33-814(G) provides:
If trust property of two and one-half acres or less which is limited to and
utilized for either a single one-family or single two-family dwelling is sold
pursuant to the trustee’s power of sale, no action may be maintained to
recover any difference between the amount obtained by sale and the
amount of the indebtedness and interest, costs and expenses.
In 804 P.2d 1310, the State’s Court of Appeals stated: 
. . . Assuming that the deed of trust falls within one of the anti-deficiency
statutes, an action for a deficiency is prohibited after a trustee’s sale on
any deed of trust and after judicial foreclosure on purchase money deed of
trust. See [State law] §§ 33-814(G) and 33-729(a). If a lender holds a non-
purchase money deed of trust, he may recover a deficiency if he does so
through an action for judicial foreclosure because [State law] §33-729(A)
applies only to purchase money liens. In this latter case, of course, the
debtor receives the protections of judicial foreclosure, including a statutory
redemption right.  
Under the State’s Anti-Deficiency statute, a homeowner and an investor who
obtained a purchase money loan on a property which is less than 2.5 acres and is
utilized for either single one-family or a single two-family dwelling, is protected from a
mortgagor or lender obtaining a deficiency judgment after foreclosure of the property.
See 804 P.2d 1310. If a property is sold under a trust deed pursuant to §33-807, an
action to recover a deficiency judgment must be filed within 90 days after the date of
dale of the trust property. See § 33-814(A) In construing § 33-729(A), the appellate
court held that this provisions barred the lender from waiving the security in property
and sue directly on the note. See 804 P.2d 1310.11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
6
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
7
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed financial problems when the economy and real estate
market significantly declined. As a result of his drastic income decline, he could not rent
his investment house; he could not sell it; and he could not pay the monthly mortgage
payment. The mortgagor foreclosed on the house. These two disqualifying conditions
apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
may mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and especially the following:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems arose when the economy seriously declined in
2007 and 2008, and his work as a realtor evaporated, causing a significant loss of
income for him. While his wife worked and he collected unemployment, he lacked
sufficient income to pay all his bills, resulting in past-due debts for him. Since starting
his current job, he has paid or settled his debts without the assistance of a financial
8
counselor. His current finances are solid; his monthly bills are paid; and his old debts
paid. 
The only issue of major concern is the foreclosure on his rental house and any
unpaid balance. Two credit reports reflect that in September 2008, the mortgage
company listed a past-due balance of $28,970. In December 2008, the mortgage
company redeemed the mortgage collateral, his investment house, which has been
sold. The mortgage company has never notified Applicant that he owed additional
money after the sale of the house, even though the credit reports continue to list the
same past-due amount of $28,970. The credit reports do not identify this amount as a
deficiency after the sale of his property. The Government argues that the continued
past-due amount is a deficiency owed by Applicant, and based on the Government’s
assertion, not information he has received from the mortgage company, Applicant has
agreed that there is a deficiency on this mortgage loan. Given that before the
mortgagee’s foreclosure on Applicant investment property in December 2008, the credit
reports clearly list a past-due amount of $28,970 in September 2008, the continued
listing of this past-due amount on the credit reports is not evidence that this amount is a
deficiency balance on the mortgage debt. A deficiency balance occurs after the sale of
the property, not before the foreclosure and sale of the property. The information on the
credit reports do not establish that the $28,970 is a deficiency balance owed by
Applicant, only that as of September 2008, his mortgage was past-due in this amount.
Applicant’s property is located in a State which has two anti-deficiency statutes.
Under state law, a mortgagee cannot collect any balance owed on a mortgage after a
trust’s sale of the property or after a judicial foreclosure on the property. The statute
includes investment property. It is unknown if the Applicant’s rental property proceeded
through a trustee’s sale or a judicial foreclosure. Given that the law allows Applicant a
right of redemption at the judicial foreclosure, one can reasonably assume that
Applicant must receive notice of such a sale before it occurs. Applicant never received
any documents from the court about the sale of his property. The December 2009 credit
report indicates that the mortgagee redeemed the rental property and a foreclosure took
place. Even if the foreclosure occurred under §33-807, the mortgagee had 90 days from
the date of sale to file an action for a deficiency judgment. The record contains no
evidence that the mortgagee filed an action for a deficiency judgment against Applicant.
Thus, under state law and the facts of this case, Applicant does not owe the mortgagee
any additional money following foreclosure. This conclusion is supported by the
mortgagee’s redemption of Applicant’s rental property and by the lack of action by the
mortgagee against Applicant to collect any additional debt from Applicant. Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d).  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
9
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial.
Applicant paid his bills and supported his family for many years. In 2006, he started
working as a realtor. He earned a good income, as the housing market was extremely
active. With his income and knowledge, he decided to purchase an investment house,
which he did in 2006. He rented the house and used the rental income to pay the
mortgage. In late 2007, his tenant moved because they could no longer afford the rent.
He unsuccessfully tried to rent the house. When he could not, he tried to sell the house
through a short sale, which failed. At the same time, his income declined significantly
because the housing market no longer provided an income for him. He fell behind in his
bills and stopped making the mortgage payments on his rental house. In December
2008, the mortgage company assumed ownership of his investment house during the
foreclosure process and later sold it. The mortgage company has never notified
Applicant that he has a deficiency balance after it sold the property nor has it obtained a
deficiency judgment against Applicant. Under state law, Applicant does not owe any
money on his defaulted mortgage.
Applicant returned to work full time in September 2008. Since then, his income
has improved as has his ability to pay his past-due debts. He has paid or resolve all his
debts arising from his period of underemployment and unemployment. He does not live
extravagantly or beyond his financial means. He pays his bills and supports his family.
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid: it is whether his financial
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. His past
financial problems are insufficient to raise security concerns because, except for the
economic downturn, Applicant has always managed his income and expenses. See AG
& 2(a)(1).)
10
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
