 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00763 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 24, 2011, and the hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
 
as scheduled on February 16, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit 
index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A 
that was admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 25, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He recently married and has no children. He has a high 
school diploma and some college. Since October 2009, he has worked for a defense 
contractor as an information technology (IT) specialist. He has no military service and 
has not previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana on 
numerous occasions from January 2002 through September 2009; and obtaining a 
prescription in California to use marijuana from December 2006 to June 2008 (See SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.b). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana in about 2002.  He used marijuana about 
once a week. He would smoke it in a pipe. He usually smoked it at home when he was 
alone. Sometimes he would smoke with his fiancée, who is now his wife. He used 
marijuana to relax after work. He obtained the marijuana from his friend.2  
 
 From December 2006 to June 2008, Applicant lived in California, a state that 
allows legal marijuana use for medical purposes. He obtained a prescription for medical 
marijuana to relieve his stress due to “personal grief not related to violence or drug use.” 
Even though he had a valid prescription to use marijuana under California law, he also 
knew marijuana use violated federal law and was against Department of Defense 
(DOD) policy. Applicant also suffers from depression and takes Zoloft for that condition. 
Zoloft has some side effects that concerned Applicant. Using marijuana to replace Zoloft 
seemed to help with his depression without the side effects. He also found that using 
marijuana helped him with a staph infection.3 
 
 Applicant decided to stop using marijuana in September 2009, before obtaining 
his current job. According to him, he has not used marijuana since that time. He also 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 7, 25; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-28; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
disassociated with his marijuana provider. He was not diagnosed as either a drug 
abuser or drug dependant and has not been through any drug treatment program.4  
 
 Applicant testified that he intends to abstain from marijuana use as long as it 
violates federal law and DOD policy. However, he does not believe marijuana is 
necessarily bad. He produced some evidence where he characterized the “top 5 myths 
about marijuana”, and listed notable users of marijuana.5  
 
 He presented statements from his father, wife, and coworkers that described him 
as honest, reliable and trustworthy. He also offered evidence of the medical impact of 
using marijuana.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22, 28; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 27; AE A. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse. 
 
 Appellant used marijuana on a number of occasions. I find the above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
 
5 
 
 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was frequent and recent (last use September 
2009). The period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent 
not to use in the future. Additionally, even though he disassociated from his 
marijuana using friends and stated that he intends to abstain from using 
marijuana, not enough time has passed to know whether Applicant’s stated intent 
are just words rather than demonstrated actions. Moreover, he does not seem to 
possess a full commitment to non-use of marijuana. This is apparent by his 
references to myths about marijuana use and notable people who have used 
marijuana. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the Applicant’s 
supportive character evidence. I also considered Applicant’s statement of intent not to 
use drugs in the future. However, I also weighed that he used marijuana on numerous 
occasions, and as recently as September 2009. He also demonstrated a lack of 
commitment toward non-use of marijuana. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
