                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:  )
 )
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.   10-01178          
                                                               )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On July 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 9, 2010, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 8, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on
December 15, 2010. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1 through 4). Applicant relied on
three  witnesses (including himself) and nine exhibits (AEs A through I). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on December 28, 2010.
Procedural Rulings
      
Before the close of the hearing, Appellant requested leave to supplement the
record with documented payments of his remaining debts. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was
afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the
record with payment documentation pertaining to a number of his listed creditors.
Applicant’s exhibits were admitted as AEs A-1 through H-2. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated eight delinquent debts
exceeding $31,000. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the listed
debts, and denied the remaining ones. He claimed he paid the debts he denied and
plans to pay the remaining ones
                     
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old engineering technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant graduated from high school in 1995 and enlisted in the Marine Corps
right after graduation. (GE 1) He met his future wife in 1998, while he was still in the
Marine Corps, and married her in July 1998. (GE 1; Tr. 68) He has two children from
this marriage for whom he is financially responsible. (GE 1; Tr. 75)  
Following his discharge from the Marine Corps in September 1999 (GEs 1 and
4), Applicant and his wife moved to another state (State 1). For the first six months
(between March 2000 and September 2000), he drove a truck as a driver trainee. (GE
1) He drove a truck for two other companies between September 2000 and March 2007.
(GE 1) 
Between March 2007 and December 2007, Applicant owned and operated his
own flooring business in State 1. (GEs 1 and 4) In this business he operated, he netted
around $1,700 a month for the first few months and prospered. He had good credit
3
during these opening months and was current with all of his bills. (GE 1; Tr. 67-68)
When his business slowed in late 2007, he took home less than $300 a month. (Tr. 67-
68, 82-86) With a wife and two children to care for, Applicant encountered difficulties in
paying his debts. (Tr. 84-86) To please his wife, they returned to his current state of
residency (State 2) in December 2007. (GEs 1 and 4)   Within weeks of their return to
State 2, she began seeing another man and abandoned Applicant. (GE 4; Tr. 74, 83-84)
In June 2008, after struggling for several months with part-time work and children
to care for, Applicant made a decision to return to State 1. (GEs 1 and 4; Tr. 85-86) In
the same month, Applicant’s wife reconciled with him, and they returned together with
their children to State 1 where he reestablished his flooring business and refurbished
their home. (GE 4; Tr. 69, 85)  Beset with growing financial problems associated with
his slowing floor business, Applicant and his wife returned again to State 2 in August
2009. (Tr. 69, 86) Shortly after his return, he went to work for his present employer. (Tr.
69-70, 86-87) His wife has not worked due to a disability problem with one of their
children. (GE 4; Tr. 90)
Applicant attended college in the east in 2005. Since August 2009 he has been
attending college locally on a full-time basis in hopes of earning a bachelor’s degree in
computer science. (GE 4; Tr. 87) He has maintained good grades in his computer
science curriculum. (GE 4)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant’s credit reports and interview summaries reveal that he accrued
significant debts between late 2007 and August 2009 due to business-related income
reductions. His credit reports reveal collection and charged off accounts with the
following creditors: creditor 1.a ($658); creditor 1.b ($535); creditor 1.c ($811); creditor
1.d ($1,073); creditor 1.e ($16,000); creditor 1.f ($2,825); creditor 1.g ($10,082); and
creditor 1.h ($995). See GEs 2 through 4.
Applicant documents his payment of a number of his listed debts. (AEs A through
H, J through N, Q, and R; Tr. 91-102) Specifically, he documents settling the following
debts: his creditor 1.a debt with a $511 check in June 2010 (AEs A and K); his creditor
1.b debt with a $375 check in September 2010 (AEs B and L); his creditor 1.c debt with
a $226 check in August 2009 (AEs C and M); his creditor 1.d debt with a check of $268
in March 2010 (AEs D, N, and P); his creditor 1.f debt with a check of $2,441 in
September 2010 (AEs E, M, and P); and his creditor 1.h debt with a check of $687 in
September 2010. (AEs F and R) This leaves his debts with creditors 1.e and 1.g still
unpaid.   
Applicant’s charged-off creditor 1.e debt represents a $16,000 delinquency
balance arising from a line of credit Applicant arranged on his home in June 2007. (GEs
2 and 3) This line of credit enabled Applicant to draw funds for improvements on his
home. (GE 4) When he defaulted on the loan in October 2008, the lender charged off
the $16,000 balance and never attempted any enforcement action against Applicant.
4
(GEs 2 and 3) In an interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in November 2009, Applicant summarized the details of his line of
credit and committed to taking care of the bill “as soon as possible.” (GE 4)  
Before the issuance of the SOR, Applicant made contact with this creditor to
explore repayment arrangements. (GE 4) In December 2010, he worked out a payment
plan with this lender that permitted him to resolve the debt with monthly payments of
$150. (AEs J and O) He documents his first $150 payment under this payment
arrangement in December 2010. (AE O)
Applicant’s other remaining debt is a deficiency balance that remained after his
repossessed vehicle was sold at a public auction in 2009.  Applicant had purchased the
truck for his business in July 2007 for around $19,000. (Tr. 103) After his flooring
business failed later that year, he encountered difficulties making the $320 monthly
payments with his part-time work and asked the lender in November 2007 to pick up the
truck. (Tr. 104-105) Later, he was notified by the lender that the truck produced $6,000
from the public sale, leaving a deficiency of $10,082. (GE 2; Tr. 107) In his interview
with an investigator from OPM in November 2009, he recounted the details of his truck
purchase and subsequent repossession and promised to “take care of this bill as soon
as possible.” (GE 4) Applicant made contact with this creditor before the issuance of the
SOR in an attempt to resolve the outstanding deficiency. (GE 4)
Creditor 1.g currently reports a $12,116 deficiency balance owing on the debt
(inclusive of accumulated interest) and has agreed to accept a lump-sum settlement
payment from Applicant of $5,530. See AE Q; Tr. 101, 108. To date, Applicant has not
made any arrangements to accept this creditor’s settlement offer, but maintains close
contact with the creditor. (GE 4) He commits to accepting the creditor’s offer as soon as
he is able to raise the required $5,300 lump sum.   
Applicant currently nets close to $3,000 a month with his recent raise. (GE 4; Tr.
88-89) This represents an increase of around $300 over his reported income in June
2010.  He reports unchanged monthly expenses of $1,669 and a net monthly remainder
of close to $1,000. (GE 4; Tr. 90)  He is in good standing with his current creditors and
is firmly committed to stabilizing his finances. (GE 4)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by his employer’s managers and colleagues as an
engineering technician. (AE I; Tr. 56-64) They consider him reliable and trustworthy in
his work assignments.
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
5
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
6
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. 
Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is
clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires
Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated
in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security
clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As
with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a well-regarded engineering technician for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts after his flooring business failed to prosper as
he had anticipated. His major debts include a charged-off line of credit (since covered by
a modest monthly repayment plan) and a deficiency balance on a repossessed truck he
had purchased for his business. Applicant has since paid all of his smaller delinquent
debts (over $6,500 of aggregate payments) in the year following his return to full-time
employment and remains liable for debts owed to creditors 1.e and 1.g. 
       Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
where the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
7
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability to pay
these debts in a timely way warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Guidelines ¶ DC 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are mostly attributable to his failed flooring business, which
caused him to get behind in some of his debts and default in others. Since he has
returned to work full time, he has repaid four of his six listed defaulted debts and has
since worked out a repayment arrangement covering his charged-off line of credit
($16,000) with creditor 1.e.  Only his creditor 1.g account with the lender who financed his
truck purchase remains unresolved. Applicant has committed to paying this debt and
accumulating funds monthly with his remainder to meet creditor 1.g’s lump-sum $5,530
settlement offer. 
Based on his evidentiary showing, extenuating circumstances contributed to
Applicant’s inability to stay current with his debts.  His extended income losses from his
flooring business is the primary contributing factor to the financial problems that beset him
in the 2008-2009 time frame. The downturn he experienced in his business left him with
insufficient resources to stay current with some of his major creditors. Available to
Applicant is ¶ MC 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation, and the individual acted responsible under the circumstances.” While some
judgment problems persist over Applicant’s taking on so much personal and business risk
with a wife and children to care for and major house and vehicle loans to repay, his
actions are considerably extenuated by unforeseen economic conditions that prevented
his curing the defaults once they were placed in delinquent status and charged off. 
In recognition of the good-faith efforts Applicant made to resolving his outstanding
debts with his four smaller creditors, and arranging monthly payment arrangements with
his largest creditor (creditor 1.e), mitigation credit is available to him. All but two of his
debts have since been repaid, and he was able to arrange a repayment plan with his
equity line lender. To his credit, he has mounted major communication initiatives with all
of his creditors and has elicited a one-time lump-sum payment option from one of his
remaining creditors (creditor 1.g) to resolve this outstanding debt. 
Applicant’s good-faith repayment efforts to date merit the application of two of the
mitigating conditions for financial considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,”
and ¶ MC 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.”   
                                                    
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
8
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding his
situation permits extenuation and considerable mitigation of his accumulated delinquent
debts. Extenuating conditions associated with his taking on too much business risk with
his flooring business and his significant family obligations all contributed to his inability to
meet  his financial obligations with his creditors. Since returning to work on a full-time
basis, he has mounted aggressive efforts to repay his creditors while taking care of his
wife and attending college on a full-time basis.  
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is substantial that Applicant has
initiated good-faith efforts to resolve his debt delinquencies. Since his return to State 2  in
August 2009, he and his wife have lived frugally and responsibly. While he retains some
exposure to enforcement actions by one creditor holding a deficiency claim on his
repossessed truck, the risks of debt enforcement against him appear to be low at this
time. He has been in touch with this creditor and is saving funds to meet the creditor’s
lump sum settlement requirements to settle the outstanding deficiency balance claimed
by this creditor (creditor 1.g).
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s delinquent debt accruals, and the good-faith efforts he has mounted to resolve
them, Applicant successfully mitigates judgment, reliability and trustworthiness concerns
related to his debts. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by the financial considerations guideline. 
        Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
9
