 
1 
 
 
                                                                
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 10-04772   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On February 4, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 22, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 16, 2010, Applicant filed an answer to the SOR and requested that 
the case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 4, 2011, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing six Items 
 
2 
 
 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on January 24, 2011. Applicant received the 
FORM on January 31, 2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. She did not submit any additional information. On March 
13, 2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in ¶ 1. Her 
admissions are incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 29 years old and single. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 
Psychology in May 2004 and a master’s degree in Criminal Justice in January 2006. 
From August 1999 to August 2004, she was employed part-time. She then worked full 
time for private companies until December 2009, when she obtained a position as a 
program cost control analyst for a defense contractor. (Item 3.) 
 
 In March 2010 Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss her 
delinquent financial obligations. During that interview, she acknowledged that her 
student loans (the bulk of her debt) were deferred until January 2009 and then went into 
a default status because she did not have sufficient income to pay them. (Item 4 at 11.)  
She told him that she intended to pay all of her debts as she becomes financially able to 
do so. (Id. at 12.)  
 
 In August 2010 Appellant submitted a set of Interrogatories. She stated that she 
had not resolved her student loans or a credit card that she opened in 2007. She noted 
that she established a plan to “better” manage her budget and pay her debts. (Item 4 at 
5.) Pursuant to that plan, she resolved four credit card debts. (Id. at 15-18.)  
 
Based on February and September 2010 credit bureau reports (CBR), the SOR 
alleged five debts totaling $29,093, of which $27,498 represented unpaid student loans. 
The remaining $1,595 is an unpaid credit card debt.  
 
Applicant offered no evidence of any payment or payment plan to resolve these 
debts. She has not obtained credit counseling. She provided no evidence concerning 
the quality of her job performance. She submitted no character references or other 
evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on two credit bureau reports and her statements, Applicant has been 
unable to satisfy delinquent debts that began accruing in 2007. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and not isolated, there is 
insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or 
continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. There is insufficient evidence to warrant 
 
5 
 
 
the application of AG ¶ 20(b) because the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR relates to 
the accumulation of unpaid student loans, and not as the result of circumstances 
beyond her control. Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 
20(d). She did not submit evidence that she received credit counseling or that her 
financial situation is under control. She did not present sufficient evidence that she 
made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her student loan debts. There is no evidence 
to support the application of AG & 20(e) or AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since December 2009. 
 
 In March 2010 Applicant learned of the Government’s concerns relating to her 
financial delinquencies, including her large unpaid student loan. In August 2010 she 
informed the Government that she paid four small debts but had not yet begun to 
address her student loans. In November 2010 DOHA filed a SOR, listing $29,093 of 
delinquent debts that consist of $27,498 in student loans. In January 2011 the 
Government filed the FORM. For almost a year, she has been on notice that her unpaid 
or unaddressed student loans were creating security concerns and potentially affecting 
her employment. Although she provided proof that she resolved four smaller debts 
during that time period, she did not submit any documentation that she contacted the 
student loan creditors to inform them of her financial problems and possibly establish a 
minimal repayment plan. While Applicant may have limited funds to address all of her 
debts, she could have taken some steps to address her student loans and accumulation 
of debt, such as obtaining credit counseling or financial assistance through her 
company’s Employee’s Assistance Program, and establishing a solid budget to resolve 
 
6 
 
 
her obligations. The record contains insufficient evidence about her character, 
trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their continuation 
less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:             Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
