1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------, --------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-02826
                )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern stemming from his marijuana
use. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its denial of Applicant’s
request for a security clearance under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2010, and requested a decision on
the record rather than a hearing. On December 22, 20I0, Department Counsel prepared
2
a File of Relevant Material (FORM) setting forth its argument against the granting of
Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant received the FORM on January 6, 2011, and
was given 30 days to file a response. Applicant did not file a response and the case was
assigned to me on February 23, 2011. Upon reviewing the FORM, I conclude that
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old married man with two teenage children. He earned a
bachelor’s degree in 1979, and two master’s degrees in 1983 and 2001, respectively.
The fields of study are unknown from the record.
Applicant, an accountant, works for a company that provides military components
for all levels of the DOD. (Item 2 at 3) He was recently promoted to the position of
controller of the company’s accounting and finance department. (Id.) He has worked at
the same company for 14 years.
Since graduating from college 30 years ago, Applicant has periodically smoked
marijuana. (Item 4 at 45) Typically, his usage occurs “at college reunions or parties
related to college friends.” (Id.) He has smoked it approximately 10 times in the past 15
to 20 years. (Item 6 at 2) Over the years, his use decreased as his family
responsibilities increased. His last use was in October 2009. Applicant provided a
signed statement memorializing his intent not to use marijuana again in the future. (Item
5 at 7) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions
listed in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
together with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
3
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug . . . can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s marijuana use triggers the application of
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation, and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including, but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Although Applicant’s use of marijuana was infrequent, it is not immaterial, as
Applicant characterized it in his Answer. Marijuana is illegal and has been illegal for the
30 years that Applicant has used it. Moreover, he just stopped smoking it less than two
years ago. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply.
Applicant’s signed statement memorializing his intention not to use marijuana in
the future triggers the application of AG ¶ 25(b)(4). Applicant, however, did not address
the issue of whether he will associate with his marijuana-using friends in the future, nor
did he provide any evidence from a counselor that his marijuana use does not pose a
problem. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.
4
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s marijuana use was infrequent, but longstanding. Moreover, because
the conduct is illegal, it calls into question his judgment. Applicant deserves credit for
disclosing his marijuana use. However, it is too soon to conclude that it has been
mitigated. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
