 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-02707    
                    ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is granted. 
  
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on September 25, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On September 22, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865 and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
(AG).2 Applicant signed her notarized Answer on November 23, 2010, admitting to the 
four allegations in the SOR. She also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 23, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on January 13, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
February 15, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 10, 2011. 
 
During the hearing, I admitted Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and offered 20 exhibits, admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through T. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documentation. She timely submitted four documents, admitted as AE U 
through X. The record closed on March 29, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 55 years old, is a widow with two adult children. She earned college 
credits, but did not complete a degree. She worked for defense contractors and held a 
security clearance without incident since 1987, with her highest level being TS/SCI with 
full-scope polygraph. In 2000, she began her own business. She performs information 
technology consultant services as a subcontractor to federal defense agencies. (GE 1; 
Tr. 47-48). 
 
Applicant's husband was a mortgage broker, and also worked part-time for 
Applicant's company. They owned properties starting with a home in 1999, and another 
in 2003. Around 2005, they began investing more significantly in real estate, and bought 
three rental properties in 2006. Applicant relied on their joint income to fund their real 
estate purchases. Before 2009, their credit rating was solid. (Tr. 48-49, 85-88) However, 
the real estate market began to founder in 2008. They were unable to keep the 
properties rented, and Applicant foresaw that they would have trouble keeping up their 
loan payments. She began talking to her lenders. She was told that because her loan 
payments were still up-do-date, nothing could be done; she would have to miss several 
payments and actually be in arrears before the lenders would discuss loan 
modifications. (AE J; Tr. 58-59) 
 
Applicant's largest loan was on a house she and her husband bought from a 
builder, with a five-year lease-back agreement (Property B). After about one-and-one-
half years, his business was affected by the market collapse, and he defaulted on his 
agreement. Applicant was left with a hefty payment. She sought legal advice, but was 
told it would be financially pointless to pursue the builder. Applicant was unable to rent 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented by the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3
                                                
the house, or her other properties. Of her four properties, three were consistently 
vacant, and one was intermittently vacant. Her financial position declined and 
delinquencies started to accrue in 2009. (AE J; Tr. 59-60) 
 
Applicant's husband passed away suddenly in February 2010. She withdrew 
funds from her 401k to keep up with the loan payments. Applicant then retained an 
attorney to assist in resolving the mortgage debts. Upon investigation, the attorney filed 
quiet title actions against the lenders for the three properties listed in the SOR, alleging 
that Applicant has been the object of fraudulent lending practices. (AE A, S; Tr. 58-62) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly remainder, after paying mortgages and other monthly 
expenses, is $2,367. Her net worth statement shows that her assets include real estate, 
savings, a 401k account, and rental income. Her net worth after deducting her liabilities 
is $332,000. The debts on the three properties cited in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d are 
supported by the Government’s credit bureau reports. The status of each debt follows. 
(GE 4-7; AE B, C, K-O) 
 
Property A (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.d) – Applicant purchased the 
property in 2006 for $325,000. She procured a first mortgage of $275,000 
(allegation 1.d), and a home equity loan of $50,000 (allegation 1.a), both 
from Lender A. In 2008, she began to fall behind on payments. She 
applied to refinance the loan, but the lender rejected the request. In 2010, 
Lender B bought the first mortgage, though lender A still serviced the loan. 
Lender B threatened foreclosure. At about that time, Applicant began 
seeking legal assistance. Lender B did not follow through on the 
foreclosure. Lender A allowed Applicant to proceed with a short sale, but 
rejected the buyer Applicant procured. In December 2010, Applicant filed 
suit against both lenders. The suit contends that no evidence exists to 
show Lender B has a legal interest in the property, and therefore has no 
right to threaten to foreclose on it.3 (AE A[a]; Tr. 69-73) 
 
Property A had a five-year adjustable rate loan. It was rented from 
January to June 2010, and became vacant when the renter left six months 
before the lease ended. The property was vacant until January 2011. The 
current renter is on a month-to-month lease, in light of the lawsuit. 
Applicant requested that the loan be reinstated, which involves re-starting 
the payments. She has been making payments on the first loan since 
January 2011. At that time, the rate dropped from seven percent to three 
percent, reducing the monthly payments. She deposits the rent she 
receives into an escrow account to cover the debt when the litigation is 
complete. She testified that “they're still negotiating what's going to 
happen with the arrears in light of the fraud.” The balance on the first loan 
 
3 Applicant also referred to violations of Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) and the Truth 
in Lending Act (TILA). (Tr. 50) 
 
 
4
 is now approximately $272,000, and the second loan balance is about 
$50,000. Lender A has responded to the suit by agreeing to negotiate a 
settlement with Applicant. (AE P; Tr. 51-52, 65, 73-80) 
 
Property B (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b) – Applicant and her husband 
purchased this property in 2006 for $1,355,000, with a first mortgage of $1 
million, and a second of $355,000. The loan included a builder lease 
buyback. In about 2008, the builder defaulted. Applicant and her husband 
used funds from their 401k account to make the payments, until they were 
no longer able to do so. Approximately $124,000 was past due. 
Applicant's 2009 credit bureau report shows a payment plan in place. The 
lender agreed to a short sale, and made a counter-offer to the buyer’s 
offer. The buyer has accepted the counter-offer, and the closing was 
imminent at the time of the hearing. The lender has agreed that the short 
sale will cover Applicant's past-due balance. (AE A[b]; Tr. 52-53, 80-83) 
 
Property C (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c) – In April 2006, Applicant and her 
husband bought this condominium for $269,000. Their mortgage 
payments were current until October 2009. After her husband’s death in 
February 2010, Applicant moved into this smaller property, which is now 
her primary residence. Applicant has filed a quiet title suit against the 
lender for RESPA and TILA violations. As of the date of the hearing, the 
lender was considering a loan modification. Applicant is placing the 
mortgage payments into an escrow account pending disposition of the 
suit. (AE A[c]; Tr. 53-56, 65, 83-85) 
 
Applicant owns two other properties that are not alleged in the SOR. The current 
renter has requested to purchase Property D, and paperwork is to be initiated in May 
2011. Property E is Applicant's first home with her husband, which is also rented. She 
has never been late on payments on either property (AE Q, R, T; Tr. 85-88) 
 
Applicant’s neighbor has known her for seven years. He served in the Air Force 
for 20 years and held a security clearance for 18 years. Before retiring he was an 
attorney and held a high government position in a U.S. territory. He testified and 
submitted a character reference. He noted Applicant is thorough and deliberate in 
financial matters. He testified to his own experience with lenders. Following surgery, he 
was having problems with meeting payments on a second home. When he approached 
his lender for a loan modification, he was told he had to miss three payments before the 
company would consider a modification or short sale. He stopped making payments so 
that he could be considered for a modification. (AE D; Tr. 34-45) 
 
Character reference letters from Applicant’s friends and business colleagues 
attest to her professionalism, integrity, and honesty. They describe her as stable and 
forthright. They noted that she has a solid character that is beyond reproach, and 
praised her inner strength and resilience. They commented on her years of supporting 
 
 
5
                                                
missions in the intelligence community, and dedication to the success of her 
government client’s mission. Applicant's subordinate has known her for the past three 
years and testified to Applicant's trustworthiness and honesty. (AE E-I; Tr. 25-32) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant had good credit until the real estate market crisis in 2008. She was 
able to keep the mortgage payments up-to-date during 2008, but to be considered for a 
loan modification, she was required to stop making payments. Applicant‘s credit reports 
show that her delinquencies started in 2009. Disqualifying condition AG ¶19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations) applies.  
 
 I have considered the conditions listed at AG ¶ 20 that can mitigate security 
concerns under the Financial Considerations guideline, especially the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation], and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant's mortgage delinquencies arose from one of the worst financial crises 
in recent memory, and it is unlikely that such circumstances will recur in the future. 
 
 
7
Moreover, her solid credit before the mortgage crisis, and the evidence that she did not 
act in a negligent or frivolous manner, demonstrate her good judgment. Her 
trustworthiness is not in doubt. AG ¶20(a) applies. 
  
 Applicant and her husband chose to invest in real estate and were successful 
for several years. However, she had no way to foresee or control the mortgage crisis, 
which played havoc with her finances. In addition, Applicant’s ability to pay the 
mortgage loans depended, in part, on her husband’s income. In 2010, he unexpectedly 
passed away. She could not have foreseen that this would occur, or that she would be 
left to carry the properties on her single income. Applicant acted responsibly: she used 
her savings to continue the payments as long as she was able. She anticipated the 
pending difficulties and contacted the lenders before she had to default, in order to 
obtain loan modifications. She places all of her rental income in accounts so that it is 
available pending the outcome of the litigation. She has been able to obtain a short 
sale on the largest of the three debts in the SOR. Applicant has provided evidence that 
she did not ignore her financial obligations and acted responsibly in the face of major 
difficulties. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Both AG ¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. Applicant had been conscientious about her 
financial obligations. During the mortgage crisis, she made the loan payments as long 
as she was able, using her 401k funds. She contacted the lenders well before she 
became delinquent to either obtain a modification, or to be allowed to use short sales. 
Her efforts failed. Finally, in mid-2010, Applicant sought legal assistance to help her 
resolve her mortgage loans. The largest debt (Property B) is resolved, as the lender 
has agreed to permit a short sale, a buyer has been obtained, and the lender’s 
counter-offer accepted. Applicant is placing the rent payments from Property A into an 
escrow account pending the outcome of the lawsuit. The lender has agreed to 
negotiate a settlement with Applicant. The lender for Property C, where Applicant 
currently resides, is considering a loan modification. Applicant is placing the mortgage 
payments into an escrow account pending disposition of the suit. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
8
 for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant's delinquencies stem from factors beyond her control. Until late 2008, 
Applicant had solid credit. Unfortunately, she and her husband owned several 
properties when the national mortgage crisis hit. Along with millions of others, they did 
not foresee what was coming. Another unforeseeable event occurred when Applicant's 
husband passed away.  
 
 Applicant has taken numerous steps to resolve the situation: She moved to a 
smaller home after her husband passed away. She contacted her lenders, and hired an 
attorney to assist in resolving her situation. She has obtained a short sale for the 
largest mortgage loan. She has reinstated one loan and resumed payments. Her 
neighbor corroborated her contention that the lender required her to stop making 
payments before it would consider her for a loan modification, as he was required to 
take the same actions to qualify. Applicant’s neighbors and colleagues attest to her 
honesty and strong character. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, It is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
