 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08272 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on December 9, 2010.2 On January 31, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
1 Item 4 (SF 86), dated June 21, 2010. 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated December 9, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 8, 2011. In a sworn 
statement, dated February 8, 2011,3 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on 
March 10, 2011, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after 
receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on March 18, 2011, and submitted an 
additional statement on March 24, 2011. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 
2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.) of the SOR. Those 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
an AFCAP monitor,4 and he is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He has never had 
a security clearance.5 He has not served in the U.S. military.6 He is a May 1991 college 
graduate with a BA degree in political science.7 Applicant worked in a variety of 
positions with various employers. He was a retention specialist from February 2000 until 
April 2004;8 an exhibitor relations representative from April 2004 until August 2006;9 
and a customer service representative from August 2006 until January 2010.10 The 
3 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 8, 2011). 
 
4 Item 4, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
5 Id. at 40. 
 
6 Id. at 22. 
 
7 Id. at 12; Applicant’s Answer to the FORM, dated March 24, 2011). 
 
8 Item 4, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
9 Id. at 17. 
 
10 Id. at 16. 
 
3 
                                      
 
arried in March 1995.  
                                                          
company that Applicant worked for laid him off in January 2010, when it filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.11 Applicant was 
unemployed, receiving unemployment compensation, until April 2010, when he joined 
his current employer.12  Applicant was m 13
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant first started to experience financial difficulties in November 2008.14 He 
had been living beyond his means and his job was not sufficient to enable him to make 
his monthly payments.15 Applicant characterized his actions at that time as operating 
with “reckless abandonment.”16 He anticipated being able to pay for his lifestyle 
eventually as he made more money, but his expectations did not meet reality.17 He was 
48 years old at the time. In November 2008, Applicant made his last payments, and 
accounts started to become delinquent. Some of the accounts were placed for collection 
with a variety of collection agents, and some of the accounts were charged off. One 
delinquent account first went to repossession and then to judgment. Applicant has 
offered no explanation why he was unable to continue making his monthly payments or 
why he could not seek reduced payments under a repayment plan. 
 
In July 2010, while being interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant commented on a number of his delinquent 
accounts. He acknowledged receiving letters and telephone calls from his creditors, and 
contended that in November 2008, he spoke to his creditors and informed them that he 
did not have sufficient funds to make any further payments or enter into any payment 
plans.18 Applicant indicated there was no way he could pay off his old debt, and he was 
contemplating filing for bankruptcy if he was unable to negotiate lower settlements.19 
Applicant has produced no evidence to indicate that he has contacted his creditors, 
established repayment plans, commenced making any payments, or taken steps to file 
for bankruptcy, since his interview.  
 
11 Id. at 17. 
 
12 Id. at 13, 15. 
 
13 Id. at 26. 
 
14 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 29, 2010), at 1, attached to Applicant’s Answers to the 
Interrogatories. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Applicant’s Answer to the FORM, supra note 7. 
 
17 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
18 Id. at 1-2. 
 
19 Id. at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
The SOR identified 11 continuing delinquencies as reflected by two different 
credit reports from 2010,20 totaling approximately $102,857. Among the delinquencies 
are credit cards and a repossessed motorcycle. Some accounts have been transferred, 
reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents, and except where the actual 
transfers are reflected in the credit reports, it is nearly impossible to follow the trail from 
one creditor to another. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in the different credit 
reports, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the same 
creditor name or under a different creditor name. Some accounts are identified by 
complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in 
some instances eliminating the last four digits, and in others eliminating other digits. In 
this regard, it appears that several of the SOR allegations duplicate other SOR 
allegations, giving the false impression that the total delinquent amount is greater than it 
actually is.  
 
In June 2007, with financing of $18,000 from a particular bank, Applicant 
purchased a motorcycle. He made monthly payments of $485 for about 18 months, and 
when he could no longer afford to continue making the payments, he requested a 
voluntary repossession.21 The motorcycle was repossessed, and several months later 
the same creditor sued Applicant on the unpaid balance.22 The July 2010 credit report 
reflects the repossession, indicating a balance of $13,212 (SOR ¶ 1.h.).23 The 
December 2010 credit report lists the judgment, in the amount of $14,673 (SOR ¶ 
1.a.).24 Applicant contends they are the same account,25 but the Government discounts 
his contention, claiming he failed to submit documents to support his contention. I 
disagree. The Government exhibits and Applicant’s statements are sufficient to 
convince me that the accounts are one and the same. Likewise, there is another 
account, with the same creditor, reflected in the July credit report with a balance of 
$21,587 (with a high credit of $14,673).26 The December 2010 credit report reflects an 
account, with the same creditor and partial account number, with a balance of $22,533 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.). This allegation duplicates the other two. 
 
There is a credit card account which had a balance of $17,752 (SOR ¶ 1.i.), 
which was charged off (rather than merely placed for collection as alleged in the SOR) 
and sold to another lender.27 According to the July 2010 credit report, the balance is 
20 Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 8, 2010); Item 7 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated December 15, 2010).  
 
21 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Item 5, supra note 20, at 12. 
 
24 Item 7, supra note 20, at 1. 
 
25 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
26 Item 5, supra note 20, at 6. 
 
27 Id. at 7. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
now zero.28 There is another account reflected in the same credit report with a different 
creditor and a high credit of $17,752 and a past due balance of $22,076 (SOR ¶ 1.g.). 
The government exhibits are sufficient to convince me that the accounts are one and 
the same. The remaining allegations are unchallenged and remain unpaid. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant ever received financial counseling covering 
such topics as debt consolidation, money management, repayment plans, or budgeting. 
On July 29, 2010, Applicant prepared a personal financial statement,29 indicating a 
monthly net income of $1,200; $875 in monthly living expenses; and no debt payments; 
with a monthly net remainder of $325 available for discretionary spending.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”30 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”31   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view tshe guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
28 Id. 
 
29 Item 6 (Personal Financial Statement, dated July 29, 2010), attached Applicant’s Answers to the 
Interrogatories. 
 
30 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
31 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”32 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.33  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”34 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”35 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
32 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
33 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
34 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
35 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Also, “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessiveness indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” may be potentially disqualifying under AG 
¶ 19(e). 
 
As noted above, Applicant first started to experience financial difficulties in 
November 2008 because he had been living beyond his means and his job was not 
sufficient to enable him to make his monthly payments. Applicant characterized his 
actions at that time as operating with “reckless abandonment.” At that point, he simply 
failed to keep up with his monthly payments, and accounts started to become 
delinquent. Some accounts were placed for collection and some accounts were charged 
off. One went to judgment. Applicant indicated that he has no current ability to pursue 
his creditors to resolve the delinquent accounts. The record is silent as to why 
Applicant’s delinquent accounts remained unaddressed by him since November 2008, 
especially since he has been gainfully employed with the exception of the four month 
period in early 2010. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@36  
36 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant was living beyond his 
means with “reckless abandonment” when his accounts became delinquent. The 
financial situation is continuing in nature, and the specific causation is not adequately 
described. In addition, there is no evidence establishing that Applicant ever received 
financial counseling. Applicant made his last payments on any of the SOR accounts in 
November 2008. He has produced no evidence to indicate that he has contacted his 
creditors, attempted to negotiate settlements, established repayment plans, 
commenced making any payments, or taken steps to file for bankruptcy. With a monthly 
net remainder of $325 available for discretionary spending, it was possible that 
Applicant could have commenced the payment of some delinquent accounts. 
Nevertheless, the creditors have not been contacted, and the accounts remain unpaid 
or unresolved.37 Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies because of Applicant’s one four-month period of 
unemployment in early 2010. That might explain why no efforts were made during that 
brief period, but the 2010 unemployment was not the causation for the 2008 financial 
meltdown. Applicant failed to describe which specific factors were beyond his control, 
other than his general lifestyle, that caused his inability to continue making his monthly 
payments. Moreover, sufficient time has passed since Applicant generated his bills and 
he still has not addressed his delinquent accounts. The reasons stated do not establish 
he acted “responsibly under the circumstances.”  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
37 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.38       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant 
spoke with his creditors in November 2008, and advised them that he was unable to 
continue making his monthly payments. He also went through a four-month period of 
unemployment in early 2010. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. 
Applicant has a history of spending beyond his means, leading to financial 
delinquencies. He simply stopped making his monthly payments in November 2008, 
and has not resolved any of his delinquent accounts. Applicant has offered no 
explanation as to why he was unable to continue making his monthly payments or why 
he could not seek reduced payments under a repayment plan. Even though he has 
sufficient funds each month to make some small payments in an effort to resolve his 
accounts and the judgment, he has chosen not to do so. Applicant indicated he was 
contemplating filing for bankruptcy if he was unable to negotiate lower settlements, yet 
he has taken no action at all. Applicant’s inaction reflects traits which raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
38 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
