 
 
1 
                                                
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-03380 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) signed on December 9, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On September 16, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865 and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2 
                                                
Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer 
on October 5, 2010, denying the six allegations under Guideline F, and the single 
allegation under Guideline E. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 4, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on November 8, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 
29, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 14, 2010. 
 
The Government offered five exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered seven exhibits, admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through G. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 22, 2010. I 
held the record open to allow Applicant to forward additional documentation. He timely 
sent four documents, which I admitted as AE H through AE K. The record closed on 
January 7, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the record evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He married in 1980, and has two children, 18 and 32 
years old, who reside with him. He served as a field communicator in the U.S. Marine 
Corps starting in 1977, serving five years on active duty, and two years inactive. He was 
honorably discharged in 1984. He earned a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration in 2007. (GE 1; AE A, C; Tr. 24-25, 28-29) 
 
From 1986 to 2007, Applicant worked as a network engineer for a secondary 
home mortgage company. He accepted early retirement after 21 years with the 
company. He began a small computer business in July 2007. He was unemployed for 
approximately one year. In August 2008, he held part-time positions as a substitute 
teacher for a county school system and as a transit driver. As of the hearing date, he 
continued to work the part-time jobs. He held a full-time position as a senior engineer 
from August 2008 to August 2009, but was terminated because he “was not doing the 
job for which I had been hired.” He testified that he held a secret security clearance 
when he was in the Marines, but did not complete a security clearance application. He 
stated that the first time he completed a security clearance application was in December 
2009, when he began a position with a federal contractor. He worked for that contractor 
until March or April of 2010. Since June 2010, he has worked for a subsequent defense 
contractor, where he performs cyber-analysis, monitoring agencies for evidence of 
cyber crimes. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 25-29, 40) 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 Before his retirement in 2007, Applicant earned more than $100,000 per year. He 
owned his own home, which in July 2010 was worth approximately $500,000. Starting in 
1990, he opened about 24 credit card accounts, half of them between 2002 and 2007. 
In 1990, he bought a townhouse rental property. The first mortgage was approximately 
$350,000 (allegation 1.c), and the second mortgage was approximately $55,000 
(allegation 1.d). His monthly payment was $2,500. He began renting the house to his 
mother and brother in 2002. In 2004 and 2005, he opened several loan accounts, 
ranging from $43,000 to $97,000. He used the money to make home improvements and 
to take trips. In 2006, Applicant applied for a $100,000 home equity line of credit 
(HELOC), secured by the townhouse. His monthly payments were $670 on the HELOC 
(allegation 1.b). (GE 4, 5; AE G; Tr. 35, 39-40)  
 
In 2007, Applicant's mother and brother suffered strokes. His brother lost his job, 
and could not pay the rent to Applicant. Another brother also moved into the townhouse. 
On the day Applicant took his early retirement in August 2007, his mother passed away. 
He testified, “I think I may have went into some kind of depression. At that point for the 
next two years I made some bad financial decisions and that’s how I got in trouble.” In 
August 2007, he went on an Alaskan cruise, which cost $16,000. In October 2007, he 
vacationed at his son’s timeshare in Maui. He did not pay for accommodations, but did 
pay for the airfare. Applicant was subsequently unemployed and underemployed, and 
lived on his retirement savings. Between 2007 and 2009, he accumulated numerous 
delinquencies. Applicant stated during his security interview that his delinquencies 
resulted from his retirement, the economic crisis, and significant losses in his 
investments and stocks. (GE 2, AE B; Tr. 22, 35-36, 39-40, 49, 67) 
 
In January 2010, Applicant had ten active credit card accounts and was at least 
one month behind on six of them. Three credit card accounts were with creditor A. One 
account, with a balance of approximately $40,000, was delinquent (allegation 1.f), but 
he did not think the other two accounts with this creditor had been more than three 
months past due. In November 2009, he reached an agreement with creditor A to make 
monthly payments of $1,200 that would be applied to three of his delinquent accounts. 
He made timely payments in the two months before his security interview in January 
2010. (GE 2, AE B; Tr. 49) 
 
Applicant investigated obtaining assistance to resolve his debts. He spoke to an 
attorney but did not hire him. He contacted two debt-consolidation companies, but did 
not hire either. One company, which he contacted in February 2010, proposed a plan to 
pay his debts of $94,779. It would have required three monthly payments of $1,409, 
followed by monthly payments of $1,137 for four years. Applicant did not retain the 
company. (AE J; Tr. 37-38) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (dated January 3, 2010 and January 3, 
2011) shows net monthly income of $7,830 and monthly expenses of $5,050, which 
leaves $2,780. The only debt payment listed is a mortgage payment of $2,101. He 
 
 
4 
                                                
believed he did not owe on any other debts, in light of his bankruptcy petition. 
Applicant's monthly net remainder is $679. (AE K; Tr. 69-71) 
 
The SOR lists the following allegations. 
 
Allegation 1.a – Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. Applicant retained an attorney in 
approximately July 2010 and filed a bankruptcy petition. The attorney’s letter 
notes that Applicant filed Chapter 7 “to ensure that his financial issues would not 
affect his security clearance.” The petition lists assets of $371,886 and liabilities 
of $794,501. It showed a total monthly income of $5,710. The income included 
two sources: his wife’s $2,821 income and Applicant's $2889 from unemployment 
compensation and “pension or retirement income.”3 The bankruptcy was 
successfully discharged on October 25, 2010. Applicant believes that all of his 
debts were included in the petition. (GE 2, 5; AE E, G; Tr. 30, 74-78) 
 
Allegation 1.b - Townhouse HELOC - $101,000. This line-of-credit account 
became delinquent in 2008. Applicant contacted the lender in 2008 and 2009 to 
negotiate a reduced payment plan. His monthly payment was $670; in June 
2009, he was sending payments of $300 every other month. The lender charged 
off the debt and sold it to a collection agency. This debt was discharged in 
Applicant's bankruptcy. (GE 2, 4, 5; AE G at 14; Tr. 39-41) 
 
Allegations 1.c, 1.d. - Townhouse foreclosure: 1st mortgage $298,000; and 
second mortgage $55,551. The value of the townhouse fell during the 
nationwide economic crisis. Between late 2007 and December 2008, Applicant 
contacted the lender several times. In November and December 2008, he 
requested a loan modification. He stopped making mortgage payments in 
December 2008. In February 2009, he was informed he did not qualify for a 
modification. In May 2009, Applicant was delinquent $5,034 on the second 
mortgage, and the lender charged off the debt and sold it to a collection agency. 
The second mortgage was discharged in Applicant's bankruptcy. (GE 2, 5; AE G 
at 20, AE I; Tr. 48) 
 
By August 2009, Applicant was $20,000 delinquent on the first mortgage. He 
knew that his lender was preparing to foreclose on the property on September 4, 
2009. He contacted a company that specialized in short sales, and was told it 
could complete a sale within a few weeks. The short-sale company secured a 
buyer, who submitted earnest money. Applicant expected the company would 
complete the short-sale before the foreclosure. Applicant states in AE I that on 
September 3, 2009, his lender agreed verbally to allow the short sale. However, 
one week later, the short-sale company informed Applicant that it could not 
proceed with the short sale because the property was being foreclosed. The 
 
3 The income listed in Applicant’s petition appears to reflect the period when he was unemployed 
(approximately March 2010 to June 2010). He started his current full-time position on June 25, 2010. (Tr. 
25) His petition was filed on July 13, 2010. (AE G) 
 
 
5 
                                                
house was foreclosed before Applicant's bankruptcy petition was filed in 2010. 
Applicant testified that when he filed his application in December 2009, he did not 
know the foreclosure had been completed. (GE 2, 4, 5; AE D, I) 
 
Allegation 1.e. - Creditor A credit card account, past due $250 – Applicant 
opened this account in 2004. His credit bureau report of December 2009 shows a 
balance of $2,270. His credit history indicates he was 90 days late four times, 
and 120 days past due at least two times. This debt was discharged in 
Applicant's bankruptcy. (GE 4 at 8; AE G at 18) 
 
Allegation 1.f. Creditor A credit card account, past due $4,300 – In June 
2003, Applicant opened this credit account. His December 2009 credit bureau 
report shows a balance of $42,206. He told the security investigator that, as of 
mid-2009, he was six months delinquent on this account, and had received 
several delinquency notices. He was behind $4,300 for at least 120 days. His 
payment history indicates he was late 30 days twice; 60 days five times; 90 days 
three times. This debt was discharged in Applicant's bankruptcy. (GE 4 at 9; AE 
G at 18) 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application in December 2009. It 
required him to disclose whether, during the previous seven years, he had experienced 
any of the following financial situations: property foreclosure; debts sent to a collection 
agency; accounts charged off by the creditor; debts more than 180 days delinquent; or 
debts more than 90 days delinquent at the time he completed the application. Applicant 
answered “No” to each of these questions.4 He did not think his townhouse had been 
foreclosed, because “it should have short-sold” and he was unaware in December 2009 
that it had been foreclosed. He did not remember any debts being sent to a collection 
agency, and did not think any were more than 180 days past due. (GE 1; Tr. 52-61) 
 
During his security clearance interview, and at the hearing, Applicant stated that 
he obtained a credit bureau report in December 2009, when he was completing his 
security clearance application. When the interviewer asked why he had not disclosed 
his financial situation on his application, despite having the report, Applicant said he 
knew his finances would be discussed during his investigation, and he did not 
intentionally falsify his application. At the hearing, Applicant testified that his security 
officer provided him with a credit bureau report when he was doing the application. He 
entered the financial information on his application, but the form would not “finalize,” so 
he decided to omit the financial information. (GE 2) He stated,  
 
And I couldn’t get my financial information to finalize and I couldn’t figure 
out why, again, being unfamiliar with this form.  So, I informed the 
 
4 Applicant testified that he failed to disclose other facts on his security clearance application: a trip 
outside the U.S. to Mexico in 2003; and unpaid federal income taxes of approximately $34,000 for tax 
year 2009. The taxes are listed in the bankruptcy petition. These items are not alleged as deliberate 
falsifications. (Tr. 64-65, 72-73) 
 
 
6 
                                                
[company] recruiter that I couldn’t get it to finalize.  He said “we need to 
submit this today” something to the effect of give me what you have and 
you can explain it all to the investigator when you speak to him. (Tr. 52)  
 
Applicant testified that several months later, he realized that it might not have 
finalized because he entered the creditors’ telephone numbers with dashes, which the 
computer program would not accept. The security clearance application that Applicant 
submitted contains telephone numbers both with and without dashes. Applicant also 
testified that he answered the financial questions truthfully and did not misrepresent his 
financial situation. Although he had two credit bureau reports when he completed his 
security clearance application – one that he had obtained and one provided by the 
security officer – he stated he did not understand the credit bureau reports:  
 
I can honestly tell you I understand what not one of them says.  Along with 
this eQIP form, I read it.  I’m an intelligent individual too.  I could not 
honestly say I understood everything that was in this form and my 
impression is all of that, well editorializing but the form is complicated. You 
are under pressure.  You are out of work.  The economy is bad.  You need 
work.  You need to save the house.  I, to the best of my knowledge and to 
the best of my knowledge I answered truthfully. (GE 2; Tr. 52-59, 97) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the AG. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an Applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the Government 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                                
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Over the years, Applicant opened 24 credit card accounts, half of them between 
2002 and 2007. By 2010, he was delinquent on at least six of them. The balance on 
one account alone was $42,000. Between 2004 and 2006, he opened several home 
improvement/home equity loans, ranging from $43,000 to $100,000. In 2007, he 
decided to retire from a well-paid position, and was subsequently unable to maintain 
payments on his numerous accounts. Applicant’s 2010 bankruptcy petition shows his 
liabilities exceeded his assets by more than $400,000. The following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains conditions that can 
mitigate security concerns. The following conditions under AG ¶ 20 are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant's delinquencies are not distant in time, as 
they were discharged in bankruptcy in October 2010, only two months before his 
hearing. Moreover, he made poor financial decisions in the years between 2002 and 
2007 by accruing an unreasonable amount of credit card and loan debt, which could 
recur in the future. Applicant's history of excessive debt raises questions about his 
reliability and judgment.  
 
 Several events that Applicant could not have foreseen or controlled affected his 
ability to meet his financial obligations. He did not know that his mother and brother 
would experience serious illnesses, with the resulting loss of his brother’s job and 
inability to continue paying rent to Applicant. These events were beyond his control. 
However, Applicant did not act reasonably in response. In 2007, after his mother had 
suffered a stroke, he went forward with a voluntary decision to leave a job that provided 
a stable and substantial income. Within two months of retiring, and with a large 
unresolved debt load, Applicant spent significant funds on two vacations. The job had 
provided a good and stable income, and subsequently, he was unemployed for a year. 
Applicant receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
   
 AG ¶ 20(c) requires financial counseling or indications that the problem is 
resolved. Applicant made sporadic efforts at obtaining financial assistance. He 
contacted a debt-resolution agency in February 2010; however, he did not retain it. In 
 
 
9 
                                                
July 2010, a few months after his security clearance interview, he retained an attorney 
and filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. In October 2010, he successfully discharged 
his debts, including those listed in the SOR. Applicant receives mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(c). 
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to repay debts. The 
Appeal Board has defined “good faith” as acting in a way that shows “reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Applicant clearly filed the 
bankruptcy petition in response to the security investigation, as stated in his attorney’s 
letter, rather than in a good-faith effort to resolve his legitimate obligations. In the same 
decision, the Appeal Board held that, “Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [this mitigating condition].”9 Applicant’s imprudent 
assumption of excessive debt led him to a situation where, ultimately, his only recourse 
was bankruptcy. Although it is a legitimate option to resolve overwhelming debt, it does 
not qualify under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence as a good-faith effort. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose true financial status, 
implicating the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant failed to report any financial issues on his 2009 security clearance 
application. He did not report that he had debts that were sent to a collection agency; 
that he had debts more than 90 or 180 days past due; that he had property which had 
been foreclosed; and that he had debts that were charged off. His 2009 credit bureau 
report shows that Applicant had debts that fell into each of these categories. Applicant 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004), quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. 
Bd. June 4, 2001). 
 
 
10 
                                                
was well aware of his delinquencies. He had received notices from creditor A, to whom 
he owed more than $40,000 on one account. He knew he was behind on the HELOC 
and was making intermittent reduced payments in mid-2009. He had been trying to 
avoid foreclosure, and he knew that the lender planned to foreclose on September 4, 
2009, three months before he completed his security clearance application. At the time 
he completed his application in December 2009, he still had not resolved his financial 
problems, yet he submitted a “clean” application, giving the Government no indication 
that finances were an issue to be further investigated. 
 
Applicant gave a variety of reasons for not disclosing his indebtedness. At his 
interview, he said he knew the information would be disclosed during his investigation. 
At the hearing, he said he was rushed by the security officer. He also said he had 
technical problems “finalizing” the application, a problem he had not mentioned during 
his security interview. Applicant had his credit bureau report available, which listed 
which debts were delinquent, charged off, sent to a collection agency, and 90 or 180 
days past due. But he stated he did not understand the credit bureau report and 
disclosed no financial issues on his application. Even without his credit bureau report in 
hand, Applicant was well aware of his financial issues. His reasons for not disclosing 
his delinquencies were not credible. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not inform any authorized government official that he wished to 
correct the answers on his application, which he maintains are accurate. Although he 
discussed his debts with the investigator during his interviews, the Appeal Board has 
held that honesty at an interview does not negate the security implications of initial 
dishonesty on security clearance applications.10 AG ¶17(a) cannot be applied. AG 
¶17(c) also does not apply. Applicant’s conduct cannot be considered minor because 
he failed to be forthright with the Government during a security clearance investigation. 
In addition, Applicant submitted his latest security clearance application a little over one 
year ago, making his conduct recent. Applicant's conduct reflects poorly on his 
reliability and judgment. 
 
 
 
10 ISCR Case No.02-23073 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar 20, 2004). 
 
 
11 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is 
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under the applicable guidelines in 
light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 When Applicant began accruing delinquencies, he was a mature adult. He was 
not prudent in the years before his early retirement in 2007, when he opened 12 credit 
card accounts, in addition to those he already had, and had first and second mortgages 
on two houses. He obtained home equity lines of credit, using the funds not only for 
home improvements but for vacations. He traveled to Alaska and Hawaii in 2007, 
immediately after he left his job, and before obtaining another job. Applicant's attempts 
at debt resolution were fitful and incomplete. Not until after he had his security 
interview did he engage an attorney to file a bankruptcy petition. When he filed the 
petition, his liabilities surpassed his assets by more than $400,000. 
 
 Applicant was well aware of the financial problems that arose between 2007 and 
2009. Yet he did not inform the government of his delinquent debts when he submitted 
his security clearance application in December 2009. During his investigation, 
Applicant offered several reasons for his failure to disclose: he knew the government 
would learn of his debts through its investigation; he did not think his debts were 180 
days overdue; he had technical problems with the application software; and he entered 
telephone numbers without dashes, which caused the software to reject his application 
– although his application clearly contains telephone numbers with and without dashes. 
Applicant's explanations were not credible, especially in light of the fact that he had his 
credit bureau report with him when he completed the application. 
 
 Overall, doubts remain as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude he has not mitigated concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
12 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
