 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-01641 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(SF 86) dated October 23, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On December 3, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG).2 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, dated December 29, 2010, Applicant requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on February 14, 2011, and I received the case on February 24, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on March 1, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 16, 
2011. 
 
I admitted five Government Exhibits, identified as GE 1 through 5. Applicant 
testified, and did not present witnesses. She did not offer exhibits or witnesses. I held 
the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. She timely 
submitted eight documents, which I admitted as AE A through H. The record closed on 
April 6, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant denied SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.j. and admitted the 
remaining eight allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old single woman, with a three-year-old child. She 
completed a bachelor’s degree in information technology in March 2010.3 She worked 
in technical support positions for private companies from 2000 to 2007. She was a full-
time student and unemployed for four months at the end of 2007. From December 2007 
to June 2008, she worked as a technical support analyst. Her daughter was born in 
March 2008. In June 2008, she left her job because the contract on which she worked 
was ending, and to care for her daughter. She began seeking employment after a few 
months. In November 2009, she found employment, and has been working full-time 
since then. (GE 1; Tr. 15, 18-29) 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant purchased a condominium for $210,000. It was 
financed through two loans with Lender A, the first for $168,000 and the second for 
$42,000. Applicant made her mortgage payments on time. Lender A sold both loans to 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the adjudicative guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Applicant has more than $40,000 in student loans that were deferred until about September 2010. She 
was unable to begin payments, and requested forbearance. They are not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
 
 
3
                                                
other lenders, the larger loan to Lender B4 and the smaller to Lender C (allegation 1.e.). 
(GE 3, 4, 5; Tr. 29-32) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant became pregnant with her daughter. She lost some time at 
work while pregnant, and for a month after the birth in March 2008. Because she had a 
contract position, she was not paid when she did not work in 2007 and 2008. After she 
left her job in mid-2008, she had no income, and her payments started to become 
delinquent. She decided to sell the condo. She contacted the lenders, and obtained a 
loan modification, but continued to try to sell the property. ((GE 2, 3, 4, 5; Tr. 29-32)  
 
 Between 2008 and 2009, Applicant tried to arrange short sales. The realtor 
obtained two offers to purchase, and submitted each to Lenders B and C. The offers 
were rejected. Applicant also considered renting the condo; however, the realtor 
advised that the rent that it would generate in the soft rental market would not cover the 
monthly mortgage payment. While the home was on the market, Applicant decided to 
move in with her fiancé in another state. She did not pay rent in that location. She used 
savings and her 401(k) funds to support herself and to pay bills. In April 2009, she 
returned to her home state, where she currently lives with her mother. (GE 1; Tr. 32-34, 
38-39) 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant's condo was foreclosed. She received a Form 1099-A 
from Lender B, the holder of the first mortgage. At the time of the foreclosure, she was 
informed by the first lender that it would not be contacting her further about the loan. 
She also believes the 1099-A indicates that the first loan was satisfied by the 
foreclosure. She thought the second loan was also satisfied, but that lender is still 
contacting her. Applicant testified, ”In reference to the second loan for the mortgage, 
from my understanding it should have foreclosed but it seems to still be open as though 
they're still trying to come after me separately …” Applicant is consulting an attorney to 
determine the status of the second loan. (GE 3; AE C; Tr. 16-17, 34-38) 
 
 In January 2010, Applicant met with a security investigator. She stated that she 
would either have her debts paid or have payment arrangements in place for all of them 
after February 2010, when she received her tax refund. In her interrogatory response, 
she updated the interview report, and stated that she did not pay her debts because the 
tax refund was less than she anticipated. At the hearing, she stated she “wasn't able to 
do as much with it as I thought.” (GE 2; Tr. 74) 
 
Applicant agrees that her debts are far beyond what she is able to resolve with 
her current income. She investigated credit counseling or debt consolidation firms, but 
did not want to pay their fees. She talked informally with friends, but received no formal 
counseling. She talked with attorneys a few days before the hearing about how to 
resolve her debts, and the amount it would cost to so do. She has been advised to 
 
4 It appears from the documentation that Lender B may have sold the first mortgage loan, as it appears 
in the credit bureau reports under Lender D (allegation 1.g.). Applicant is unfamiliar with Lender D. (GE 
3, 4) 
 
 
4
                                                
consider a Chapter 7 bankruptcy rather than debt consolidation. One attorney provided 
her with a list of documents she will need to file a bankruptcy petition. She is also 
considering filing the petition on her own. She has not retained an attorney or completed 
any paperwork to initiate a bankruptcy petition. (AE F; Tr. 49-51, 65-66) 
 
Applicant receives net income of approximately $1,700 per month. She also 
receives about $100 from her daughter’s father for child care. She does not have a 
written budget. She contributes about $450 per month to the support of her mother’s 
household. She was given a 2006 car, and so does not have car payments, but spends 
about $80 per month on gas. Her other monthly expenses include $500 on her 
daughter’s needs; $840 on daycare; and $175 for other expenses. She contributes to a 
retirement plan, but has had to make hardship withdrawals, and it now amounts to 
approximately $200. She has a total of about $350 in her checking and savings 
accounts. She does not have any open credit card accounts. (Tr. 39-49) 
 
 Applicant's delinquencies appear in credit reports dated November 2009, April 
2010, and July 2010. (GE 3-5) As they are listed in the SOR, they total more than 
$72,000.5 The largest alleged debts relate to Applicant's mortgage loans. The non-
mortgage debts in the SOR total $10,317, and include telephone bills, utilities, cable 
bills, and two credit card accounts. The status of the SOR debts follows. 
 
$        Medical: $170, UNPAID (allegation 1.a) – In 2009, Applicant incurred this debt 
for her daughter’s doctor. She believed it was covered by insurance, but now 
realizes it was not. She testified she is “working to repay that” but has not made 
any payments toward it. (Tr. 51-53) 
 
• Cable: $445, UNPAID (allegation 1.b.) - Applicant did not pay the last cable bill 
when she moved from her condo in June 2008. She believes the debt should be 
between $200 and $300. She has not made any payments toward this debt. (GE 
2; Tr. 53) 
 
$        Credit card: $1,285, UNPAID (allegation 1.c.) Applicant opened this account in 
2000 or 2001. She was making payments one point, but she is uncertain of the 
date. She believes she made her last payment in 2009 or 2010 with part of an 
income tax refund. She testified the balance is probably now about $1,400 or 
$1,500. (GE 2; Tr. 53-55) 
 
• Credit card: $394, UNPAID (allegation 1.d.)  - Applicant opened this credit card 
account in 2007. Her last payment was in 2009. (GE 2, 5; Tr. 55-56)  
 
$        Mortgages: $41,753 (allegation 1.e.); $14,195 (allegation 1.g.) - Both allegations 
relate to Applicant's condo that was foreclosed in 2009. Allegation 1.g. is a past-
 
5 Allegation 1.f. (auto loan) is a duplicate of allegation 1.h. Therefore, I am including in the total only the 
amount cited at allegation 1.h., $6,831, as shown in GE 5. 
 
 
5
                                                
due amount on the first mortgage, as listed in Applicant's credit bureau reports. 
However, Applicant no longer owes payments on that loan. The lender has 
provided Applicant with a IRS Form 1099-A, which relates to foreclosure of 
secured properties. The lender has also informed Applicant that the matter is 
closed. Applicant did not, however, submit evidence showing that the second 
mortgage was satisfied through the foreclosure (allegation 1.e.). The record 
evidence is insufficient to determine whether or not she is liable for a deficiency 
on the second loan. She is seeking legal advice on its status. (GE 3, 4; AE C) 
 
• Auto loan: $6,331, UNPAID (allegation 1.f.) - Applicant bought this 2005 car in 
2005. She was five to six months behind in December 2008, and paid $1,500 to 
bring the loan current. Her last payment was in about February 2009. At her 
security interview in January 2010, she planned to set up a payment plan and 
have the account up-to-date by February 2010. Applicant voluntarily returned the 
car in 2010, because she was unable to keep up payments. She believes that the 
car was sold, and that she now owes $2,415. She has not contacted the 
company that currently holds the debt because she would not be able to make 
payments. (GE 2; Tr. 56-59) 
 
• Allegation 1.h. is a duplicate of allegation 1.f. See above. 
 
• Utility: $376, DISPUTED (allegation 1.i.) – The debt relates to a gas bill. 
Applicant disputed it with the credit reporting agencies, because she had paid all 
the gas bills related to her condo. It has been deleted from her most recent credit 
report. (AE B; Tr. 60-61) 
 
• Telephone: $816, DISPUTED (allegation 1.j.) – Applicant last had service from 
this cellular phone company in 2000. She believes this debt is an error. Her 
2009 credit bureau report shows that she disputed the account with the credit 
reporting agencies. During her security interview, she said she would pay some 
but not all of the amount alleged, and would make payment arrangements by 
February 2010. It does not appear on Applicant's July 2010 credit bureau report, 
but Applicant provided no evidence showing the outcome of the credit agencies’ 
investigation. (GE 5; Tr. 61)  
 
Policies 
 
 Security clearance decisions must be fair, impartial, commonsense 
determinations based on examination of all relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.6 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. 
 
 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6
                                                
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7
 Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent in 2008. Although the status of 
her second mortgage is unresolved, she owes more than $10,000 in non-mortgage 
debt. The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant's debts are both numerous and recent, as they have continued from 
2008 to the present. Her financial delinquencies resulted from unexpected events – a 
difficult pregnancy which caused her to have unpaid absences from work; 
unemployment for 17 months; and a soft housing market that made her property 
difficult to sell. Applicant could not predict these events, and they had a negative effect 
on her ability to pay her debts. She acted reasonably in relation to her mortgage 
obligation when she decided to sell her condo, but the mortgage crisis made that 
option unsuccessful. The house was foreclosed. However, she had other debts that 
amounted to approximately $10,000, which started becoming delinquent in 2008. She 
did not act reasonably in relation to these debts. In the years since 2008, she did not 
make an effort to work out payment plans or otherwise resolve these debts. She can 
claim only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b). In addition, although she spoke informally 
with friends about finances, she did not seek any formal financial help during the years 
that her debts mounted. Her financial situation is not under control, and AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 
8
 Since 2008, Applicant has not worked to pay her debts. She did make efforts to 
sell her home, and applied for a loan modification. Her mortgage problems stem in part 
from the lender’s refusal to accept her buyers’ offers. She did successfully dispute a 
utility bill, and provided a document showing it had been deleted from her credit bureau 
report. AG 20(e) applies as to that debt. However, she made no effort to work with 
creditors for the remaining significant non-mortgage debt. She accrued almost $10,000 
in these other delinquencies, and made no effort to contact creditors, establish 
payment plans, or otherwise resolve them. Her efforts in contacting attorneys have 
been intermittent and have not resulted in any concrete plan. Although she is 
considering bankruptcy, she again has not taken steps to put that plan in motion. 
Applicant's lack of effort in relation to her debts precludes full mitigation under AG 
20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant was financially stable in 2007 and earlier, and was able to qualify for a 
home loan. Her fortunes changed when she lost pay due to pregnancy-related 
absences, and a lack of income when she decided to stay home to care for her 
daughter. She was then unable to find work, and was unemployed for about 18 
months. She realized she could not handle the mortgage payments. She worked with 
the lenders and obtained a loan modification, and also tried to sell the condo. However, 
the property was foreclosed.  
 
 Applicant's period of unemployment affected her ability to pay her debts. 
However, she has been working full-time since 2008. Since at least 2009, when she 
 
 
9
completed her security clearance application, she has been on notice that 
delinquencies are a security concern. Yet there is little evidence that she made any 
effort in regard to her non-mortgage debts. She has not contacted creditors, arranged 
payment plans, or otherwise dealt with her delinquencies, except to dispute two debts. 
She did not consult with an attorney until 2011. Finally, Applicant is considering filing a 
bankruptcy petition, but has done little to implement that plan. Under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence, an Applicant does not have to show that she paid every debt, or 
paid every debt in full; but she does have to show that she has a viable plan in place 
and has taken steps to implement that plan. Applicant's lack of attention to the status of 
her second mortgage, and lack of a plan to pay the other $10,000 in non-mortgage 
delinquencies, fails to demonstrate reliability and good judgment.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f.  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g. – 1.i.  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.j.   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
