KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Clearance Decision Statement from other government agency supports Judge’s finding
that Applicant intended to mislead investigators as to the extent of his drug use.  Judge’s findings
of fact were based upon substantial record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-02011.a1
DATE: 05/10/2011
DATE: May 10, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-02011
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 17, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 28, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether some of the Judge’s findings were
supported by substantial evidence; whether the Judge erred in concluding that he had deliberately
provided false answers during previous security clearance processing; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following discussion, we affirm the decision of the Judge.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is employed by a
Government contractor as a lead subcontracts representative.  He holds a bachelor’s degree and has
worked for his current employer since February 2009.
Applicant began using marijuana in September 1998, when he was a freshman in college.
He continued using marijuana throughout his college career while socializing with friends.  About
30% of the time, Applicant purchased the marijuana that he and his friends used.  Once, in March
or April 2003, Applicant was on a trip for spring break.  He smoked marijuana several times with
friends during this trip.  Also, he ate a brownie containing marijuana or some other drug, which
caused him to hallucinate and lose control of his body.  After recovering, he decided never to use
illegal drugs again.
In April 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).  His security
officer told him that the Government agency through which he was seeking the clearance did not
want applicants who had been involved with illegal drugs within two years of applying.  The SCA
asked about any illegal drug use by Applicant.  He stated that he had used marijuana once, in
September 1998, and that he had not used it again.  
In August 2004, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from another Government
agency pursuant to his request for a clearance.  He stated that he had used marijuana once per month
between September 1998 and December 1999 and ate a brownie spiked with marijuana in March
2003.  He told the investigator that he had not provided the full extent of his marijuana use because
he was afraid that if he told the truth he might not be hired by his employer.  He admitted that he had
intended to mislead the Government concerning his involvement with drugs.  
In April 2009 Applicant completed another SCA.  In response to a question about the extent
of any illegal drug use, he stated that he had used marijuana from September 1998 to April 2003.
He estimated that he had used marijuana “about 1 time every 4-5 months” during college and that
he “socially smoked at college parties every now and then.”  Decision at 4. 
Applicant has a good reputation for the quality of his job performance, dependability, and
character.  
Applicant contends that he did not deliberately falsify his 2004 SCA.  He challenges the
Judge’s conclusions to the effect that he had attempted to mislead the Government concerning the
extent of his drug use.  In formulating her findings and conclusions, the Judge relied in part on the
Clearance Decision Statement from the other Government agency, included in Government Exhibit
2, Answers to Interrogatories.  This document explained to Applicant the reasons that the agency
denied him a clearance.  Among other things, this document described Applicant’s statements to the
security clearance interviewer in August 2004.  The Judge stated that she considered this document
1“[W]hen I filled out that information I had no idea about, my security officer told me there was a two-year
buffer zone for the agency.  You know, they didn’t want you to be involved in drugs for two years between when you
applied and when you last did drugs.  Now, you know, I didn’t know that information, but it wasn’t –there was no benefit
in my eyes for me to say 2003 versus ‘98 versus ‘85 versus this morning, in my eyes.”  Tr. at 53-54.  
to be an official record compiled in the regular course of business.  Decision at 2, note 1.  See
Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  See also ISCR Case No. 08-06997 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011).  This
Clearance Decision Statement, along with the other evidence in the record, supports the Judge’s
conclusions that Applicant had deliberately understated the extent of his drug use, in an attempt to
mislead the Government.  
Applicant challenges certain of the Judge’s findings of fact, for example that he had told the
other agency that he had feared not being hired if he had admitted the true extent of his illegal drug
use.  He also challenges the Judge’s finding that, at the time he completed his 2004 SCA, he was
aware that the other agency did not want an applicant who had used illegal drugs within two years.
On this latter point, the evidence, which consists of Applicant’s hearing testimony, is somewhat
ambiguous.1  However, the Judge’s finding is a reasonable interpretation of the evidence and is
sustainable.  Even if we were to conclude that the Judge erred in this finding, the error would be
harmless.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon substantial record
evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”)
   The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order 
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
