1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-01162
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I grant Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86) on September 9, 2009. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on October 28, 2010, detailing security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, that provided the basis
for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on November 3, 2010. He answered the SOR on
November 22, 2010 and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA
received the request on November 24, 2010, and Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on January 24, 2011. I received the case assignment on February 1, 2011.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 23, 2011, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on March 11, 2011. The Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1
through GE 11, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits marked as AE A through AE D, which were
received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on March 22, 2011. I held the record open until April 15, 2011, for
Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE E through AE L,
without objection. The record closed on April 15, 2011.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on March 7, 2011, less than 15 days before
the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the
notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15-day
notice. (Tr. 9)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a- 2.f
of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to1
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
Applicant, who is 32 years old, works as an electrical and systems integration
engineer for a Department of Defense contractor. He began his current employment in
May 2008. He previously worked for a Department of Defense contractor from 2001 to
GE 1; Tr. 32.2
GE 1; Tr. 32-33.3
AE K; AE L; Tr. 83-90.4
Tr. 33-34, 66.5
Id. 68-70.6
3
2007. He held a security clearance from 2002 until he voluntarily returned his clearance
in 2007 when he no longer needed it.2
Applicant graduated from college in March 2001 with a bachelor’s degree in
electrical engineering. He has worked as an engineer since his graduation. He and his
wife married in October 2008 and anticipate the birth of their first child in August 2011.
Applicant has a nine-year-old daughter, who lives with him as he has full custody of her.
His wife does not work full-time.3
Financial
Applicant earns $1,672.60 a week in gross income and $1,210.70 a week in net
income. He receives $1,032 a month in rental income and his wife earns approximately
$100 a week babysitting. His net monthly income totals $6,275. His monthly expenses
total $4,401 and include his rent, mortgage on his rental property, utilities, student
loans, phone, cable, car payment, gasoline, insurance, food, and other miscellaneous
expenses. He has savings valued at almost $20,000 and anticipates $14,500 in federal
and state income tax refunds for 2010. He is current on his loans and debts.4
In 2006, a team of “friends,” actually friends of a friend, approached him about an
investment opportunity. The team of “friends” consisted of a real estate broker, a
mortgage broker, and a property manager. These “friends” convinced him to purchase
rental properties for investment. The properties would be rented and maybe sold at a
later date if the value of the property increased.5
Through the team of “friends”, Applicant purchased four rental properties at the
same time in 2006. He also owned his own residence. He rented the properties for two
years. When the economy started to decline in 2008, the tenants in one property
moved, which resulted in a rental income loss on one property. He did not find new
tenants and used his savings of $5,000 to make the mortgage payments and repairs.  6
After exhausting his savings in 2008, Applicant met with a financial advisor, who
advised him to sell his investment properties. Before he listed his property for sale, he
attempted a loan modification, but he did not qualify. Applicant listed his investment
properties for sale at a market price lower than his purchase price and his loan debt. As
a result, each property was considered a “short-sale”. Before the bank would approve
AE E; AE F; Tr. 34,69-74.7
GE 4.8
AE A; AE C; Tr. 25-26, 37-39, 43, 75.9
AE J.10
GE 5, p.2; AE B; AE J; Tr. 39-41, 44-45, 75-83.11
GE 5- GE 7; AE D; AE L; Tr. 75-78, 79, 84.12
AE G; AE H; Tr. 36, 67-68.13
4
the short-sale of the property, the bank required him to default on his loans. Applicant
defaulted on his investment property mortgages in 2009.7
Applicant sold one house to the tenant in 2009. He received a 1099-C form from
the mortgage lender and reported the sale of this property on his 2009 federal and state
income tax returns.  Concerning the mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, this property sold8
through a short-sale in 2010. Applicant financed this property with a primary (SOR ¶
1.a) and secondary (SOR ¶ 1.c) mortgage. He and the primary mortgage lender
reached settlement on his debt, which has now been paid, and his outstanding primary
mortgage debt resolved. The secondary mortgage lender cancelled its debt and
provided Applicant with a 1099-C form.  Applicant reported the 1099-C information on9
his 2010 federal and state tax returns.  The mortgage lender for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b10
cancelled the balance of Applicant’s debt on a third rental property, which did not sell,
and provided Applicant with a form 1099-C and a form 1098. Applicant also reported
this cancelled debt on his 2010 federal and state tax returns.  The three debts listed in11
the SOR are resolved.
Applicant has not sold a fourth rental property and cannot sell it in the current
real estate market. He is working with the bank towards a cancellation of the debt in
exchange for a “deed-in-lieu” to the property. He will use his savings to resolve any
balance. Applicant continues to own his personal residence. He receives rental income
from the city government, pays property taxes to the city on this property, and pays his
monthly mortgage payment.12
Applicant believes he was the victim of a scam when he became involved with
the team of “friends” because he should never have qualified for these four mortgages
on his 2006 income. In May 2008, he received a letter from the Attorney General’s
Office in his state, requesting information from him. He provided the requested
information. Two  members of the team of “friends” were indicted by the State and one
has entered into a consent judgment with the State. It is unknown if the State indicted
the third team member.13
GE 2; GE 8; Tr. 46-48, 60-63.14
Tr. 48-57.15
5
Personal Conduct
As a 20-year-old college student, Applicant used cocaine approximately five
times between September 1998 and November 1998. He has not used cocaine again.
When Applicant completed his first SF 86 in May 2001, he acknowledged using cocaine
on two occasions in November 1998. He lost his job in November 1998 because he
tested positive for cocaine use. The loss of his job had a significant impact on him and
led to his decision not to use drugs in the future and to change his associates. When he
met with the DoD investigator in November 2002, he disclosed that he had used
cocaine a total of five times between September 1998 and November 1998. Applicant
credibly explained that during his discussions with the investigator, he remembered
three other occasions when he used cocaine. His memory was refreshed through the
questions asked, not by any specific information presented to him by the investigator.
He credibly testified that he had no intent to hide information from the Government
about his cocaine use, and that he provided truthful information to the best of his
knowledge when he completed his 2001 SF-86.14
On October 3, 1998, the police arrested him and charged him with two counts of
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) and with underage consumption of alcohol.
The court found him guilty of underage consumption of alcohol, sentenced him to 10
days in jail, with 9 days suspended, and fined him $400. Two months later, on
December 5, 1998, the police arrested him and after he failed the field sobriety test,
charged him with two counts of DUI, underage consumption of alcohol, and operation in
violation of a restriction. In February 1999, the court found him guilty of one DUI count
and operation in violation of restriction. The court sentenced him to jail for 24 hours,
fined him $400, and ordered him to attend alcohol awareness education classes.
Applicant attended the alcohol awareness classes and some alcoholics anonymous
programs in 1999. He denies any diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence during this
time or later.15
The police arrested and charged Applicant with a third DUI in the summer of
2004. In September 2004, the court found him guilty, sentenced him to 10 days in jail,
fined him, and ordered him to attend alcohol counseling. Applicant attended 10 alcohol-
related classes, which he described as classes and group sessions only. He did not
receive any medical treatment at this time. He never met with a counselor for an
individual evaluation. He did not receive a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence in 2004 or a recommendation for AA attendance or counseling. Since his
2004 arrest, he has changed his consumption of alcohol. He consumes one or two
beers once a week at home or occasionally at the homes of relatives. He does not drive
Id. 49-51, 57-59.16
GE 9.17
6
until the effects of the alcohol have worn off, and he will stay the night, if necessary. He
prefers to spend time with his wife and daughter.16
The record contains a treatment summary and discharge summary for Applicant
related to his alcohol treatment in 1999. The report contains conflicting information
which undermines the reliability of this report, The August 1999 report indicates that
Applicant, who was 20 years old, is single. Yet, the report later discusses his
relationship with his wife and how he treats her. (p.5 of GE 9) Applicant married in 2008.
The report also indicates that he drank excessively, got into fights after drinking too
much, has been sick from drinking too much, and becomes more aggressive after
drinking too much. Applicant denied this finding. The basis for this information is not
identified in the report and is not supported by the record evidence. Given the
inaccuracies about Applicant’s marital status and lack of supporting information for the
alcohol findings, this report is given limited weight.17
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
7
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed significant financial problems when he purchased four
homes for investment, then decided to sell the homes at a loss, leaving a mortgage
deficit. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
may mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and especially the following:
8
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant purchase four homes for investment in 2006 when the economy was
favorable. He rented the houses; however, in 2008, the economy began a serious
economic downturn. One tenant moved out of a house, and he could not find a new
tenant. After exhausting his savings to pay the mortgage and repair the rental houses,
he met with a financial advisor, who told him to sell the rental properties. Before he
attempted to sell the rental properties, Applicant applied for a loan modification with the
mortgage lender, but was denied. He listed his properties for sale at a market price
much lower than his mortgage debt. He eventually sold one property at the lower price
with the approval of the mortgage lender. To get approval for a short-sale of his
investment property, he defaulted on his mortgage loans at the request of the lender.
Since defaulting on his mortgages, he has worked with the mortgage lender to resolve
all the financial issues related to his investment properties. He and the mortgage
lenders for the properties in the SOR have resolved their financial issues. He pays his
current bills and lives within his financial means. He does not live beyond his income
and has significant assets in savings. He has mitigated the security concerns under the
above criteria.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
9
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and,
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
Applicant experimented with cocaine as a college student in 1998, which caused
him to lose his job because he failed a drug test at work. During this same time period,
the police arrested him for DUI on two occasions. Almost six years later, the police
again arrested him for DUI. A security concern is raised under AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d).
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his May 2001 SF 86,
when he failed to state that he used cocaine five times in 1998. This information is
material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness and honesty. In his response
and at the hearing, he denied that he had an intent to hide the extent of his cocaine use
from the Government. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government
has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313318
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
10
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or
state of mind at the time the omission occurred.18
Applicant acknowledged his cocaine use when he completed his SF 86 in May
2001. He indicated he used it twice, which he believed was truthful when he completed
the SF 86. When he met with the security investigator over a year later, he voluntarily
admitted to three additional uses of cocaine in 1998. His admission came as a result of
his conversations with the investigator which refreshed his memory about the extent of
his use. Based on his credible testimony, I find he had no intent in 2001 to deceive the
Government about the number of times he used cocaine. The Government has not
established that the Applicant intentionally omitted any material information from his
2001 SF 86. SOR allegation 2.e is found in favor of Applicant.
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that may
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through
17(f), and especially the following:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and,
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant’s drug use occurred more than 12 years ago when he was a college
student. Losing his job became a wake-up moment for him about the problems he could
create for himself if he continued his cocaine use. He decided to cease using cocaine
and change his friends. He has no regrets about this decision and has not used drugs
for over 12 years. After two DUIs in 1998, he continued his alcohol consumption. When
he received a third DUI in 2004, he realized he needed to change his behavior and
attitude towards alcohol, and he did. He participated in AA for a time, even though he
11
has not been diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. He drinks one or
two beers on a weekend and does not drive if he has consumed alcohol. He uses
alcohol responsibly. He has changed his lifestyle, focusing on his career and family. His
past use of cocaine and his past DUIs do not reflect negatively on his current judgment
and trustworthiness, nor can this past conduct be used to exploit, manipulate, or coerce
him to reveal classified information. He has mitigated the security concerns arising from
his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems arose when the economy spiraled downward, making it difficult for
him to rent his investment properties. After consulting with a financial advisor, Applicant
sought a loan modification with the mortgage lender for his rental properties, but was
denied his request. When he listed his investment property for sale at a price much
lower than his loan debt, his mortgage lender required him to default on his loans before
it would approve a short-sale of any property. Two properties sold, but the other two
properties did not sell. Throughout his financial crisis, Applicant worked proactively with
12
his mortgage lender. As a result, he resolved his SOR debts. The cancellation of his
mortgage debts did not create a tax liability for him. He pays his regular living expenses
and has money saved. His finances are sound, and he does not live beyond his
financial means.
Applicant’s drug use occurred over 12 years ago, when he was a college student.
His job loss in 1998 because of his cocaine use changed his attitude about drugs. He
realized the negative impact his behavior was having on his career and decided that
drug use would not be a part of his future. His excessive alcohol consumption changed
after his third DUI in 2004, nearly seven years ago. With maturity, Applicant has
changed his attitude about alcohol, limiting his use. He prefers to spend time with his
family and to develop his career. He credibly explained at the hearing that he tried to be
truthful to the best of his knowledge when he completed his SF 86 in May 2001. During
the course of his clearance interview in 2002, Applicant admitted to additional cocaine
use after questions from the investigator triggered his memory, not after being
confronted with information. Given that he admitted to cocaine use when he completed
his SF 86, the Government was on notice about his use of cocaine. Since he was never
arrested for drug use, the Government learned about his cocaine use from him. One-on-
one interviews provide him a way to freely establish additional information. Applicant’s
past conduct is not a security concern.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances and
personal conduct under Guidelines F and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
13
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
