 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01574 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2010, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 15, 2011, he changed 
his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on March 15, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 30, 2011, and the 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on April 21, 2011. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 4, 2011. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
Applicant affirmatively waived his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days 
notice before the hearing. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing the allegation 
under Guideline E. Applicant did not object to the amendment, and it was granted.  
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open until May 6, 2011, for Applicant to 
submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence 
before the record closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He seeks to retain a 
security clearance he has held since 2004. He worked for another defense contractor 
from 1973 to 2003. He has worked for his current employer since 2003. He has a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He is married with two adult children and an 
adult stepchild.1 
  
 Despite steady employment and earning a good salary, Applicant has had 
financial problems for many years. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1992. His debts 
included unpaid state and federal taxes. He completed his plan and his dischargeable 
debts were discharged in about 1995.2 
 
 Applicant continued to have financial problems after his bankruptcy. He did not 
have sufficient money withheld from his paycheck for state and federal taxes, and he 
did not pay the amount owed when they were due. The SOR alleges Applicant owes the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $51,132. Applicant admitted that his actual debt to the 
IRS is more than that, because he owes about $14,000 for his 2010 federal taxes.3   
                                                          
1 Tr. at 32-33, 36-38; GE 1; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 40-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 11. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-32, 41-42; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
3 
 
 In 2005, Applicant’s state filed a tax lien of about $25,859 against him. His wages 
have been garnished every month since then to pay his state taxes. Applicant has 
continued to accrue unpaid state taxes since 2005. He owes for every year from 2005 to 
2009. He paid his 2010 state taxes. He estimates that he still owes the state about 
$25,000.4   
 
 In addition to his bankruptcy and unpaid state and federal taxes, the SOR alleges 
seven delinquent debts with balances totaling about $16,000, that Applicant was at least 
120 days past due on a $28,609 student loan account, and that his wages were 
involuntarily garnished about $4,000 to pay a judgment on a car loan. The status of 
individual debts is discussed below.  
 
 Applicant stated that he paid the $258 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He did 
not submit any documentary evidence proving the payment. He stated that the $258 
medical debt to the same collection company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, represented a 
duplicate account. The 2009 credit report lists two accounts. The two most recent credit 
reports in evidence only list one account. There is insufficient evidence for a 
determination that the second $258 debt represents a separate account.5   
 
 Applicant denied owing the $128 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. He stated 
that he did not recognize the collection company handling the debt. The debt is listed on 
the 2009 credit report, but not the two most recent credit reports. I find that debt to be 
successfully disputed.6  
 
 Applicant owes about $51,000 in student loans that became delinquent at various 
points between about 2000 and 2007. His wages were garnished in 2009 for his student 
loans. He consolidated his various loans in 2010, and he has consistently made the 
monthly payments under that plan.7 
 
 Applicant submitted documentary evidence that he paid the delinquent debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, with a $975 payment in May 2010.8 
 
 Applicant stated that the garnishment for his car loan has been satisfied. He 
admitted owing the other debts alleged in the SOR. The amount of the debts are $1,803 
(SOR ¶ 1.c), $6,497 (SOR ¶ 1.d – for LASIK eye surgery and dental work), and $5,624 
(SOR ¶ 1.g – credit card). He did not submit proof of any payments toward those debts.9  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 26-28, 52-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 48; GE 8-10. 
 
6 Tr. at 48-49; GE 8-10. 
 
7 Tr. at 21-25, 46-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 7; AE B-D. 
 
8 Tr. at 24, 52; AE E. 
 
9 Tr. at 49-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4-6, 8-10. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant admitted that he overextended himself, he made “bad choices,” and he 
was “irresponsible” about his finances. When he received his security clearance in 
2004, he signed a letter acknowledging that he had financial issues in the past, and any 
future financial problems could adversely impact his security clearance. His annual 
salary is about $122,000. His wife earns about $56,000 a year. He pays his adult 
children’s rent and some of their car expenses. He stated that he has discretionary 
income at the end of the month, but he does not know where it goes. He received 
financial counseling about ten years ago. He stated that he is attempting to pay his 
debts, by paying the smallest accounts first.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 34-39, 44-45, 55-57; GE 2, 3; AE A. 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues go back at least two decades. He admitted that he 
overextended himself, he made “bad choices,” and he was “irresponsible” about his 
finances. He owes more than $50,000 to the IRS and about $25,000 to his state for 
unpaid taxes. He now has a payment plan for his student loans, and he paid the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.k. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to those debts only. He 
received financial counseling about ten years ago, but his finances are not under 
control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they 
are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(c) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i 
and 1.j. In sum, I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s long employment in the defense industry. Despite steady 
employment and a good salary, Applicant has had financial issues for more than two 
decades, with no reasonable chance of resolution in the foreseeable future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
