 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-04698 
                       ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on March 8, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 On October 26, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant 
submitted an Answer to the SOR, in which he admitted the three allegations. He signed 
his notarized Answer on November 10, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 6, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
January 10, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 27, 2011. 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were marked and admitted as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant and three witnesses testified, and he 
offered 18 exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through R. I granted 
Applicant's request to hold the record open to submit additional documentation. 
Department Counsel forwarded one document, without objection, which I admitted as 
AE S. The record closed on February 1, 2011.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts relating 
to India, set forth in fifteen documents, and an attached summary (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I). The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and 
not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 39 years old, was born in India. He earned a masters degree in 
computer applications there in 1995. He did not serve in the Indian military. He married 
in 1997, and came to the United States in 1999, at the age of 28. Applicant and his wife 
became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2009.3 His two children, 7 and 11 years of age, are 
native-born U.S. citizens. He is a principal consultant for a defense contractor where he 
has worked since 2002. Applicant's wife works outside the home. Applicant's and his 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 Applicant possessed an Indian passport that would have expired in 2004 or 2005. He surrendered it to 
his facility security officer. She submitted a letter stating that she destroyed it. Guideline C is not alleged. 
(GE 2; AE M; Tr. 54) 
 
 
3
wife’s annual salaries amount to almost $200,000. This is Applicant's first application for 
a security clearance. (GE 1, AE B, F, K; Tr. 45-46, 49, 56-59)  
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His mother, 63 years old, 
taught intermittently in private schools in the 1980s or 1990s. She is now a housewife. 
She visits Applicant in the United States and stays for several months per year. 
Applicant's father is 64 years old. He was bank branch manager until his retirement in 
2000 or 2001. Applicant is uncertain whether the bank was affiliated with the Indian 
government. He has visited Applicant in the United States twice in the past ten years. 
Applicant talks with his parents by phone weekly, and contacts them by email two to 
three times per month. Applicant's parents are unaware of the type of work he performs, 
or that he is seeking a security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Answer; Tr. 46-52, 57-59, 64) 
 
Applicant has one brother, 34, who is a citizen and resident of India. They are in 
touch approximately once per week. He works for a privately owned company. 
Applicant's brother has no affiliation with the Indian government. (GE 2; Tr. 52, 71-72) 
 
Applicant visited his family in India in 2005, and twice in 2008. When he visits, he 
stays two to three weeks. On those occasions, he sees his parents and brother. He also 
visits his parents-in-law, who are citizen-residents of India. They visit Applicant and his 
wife in the United States every two to three years. Applicant talks with them 
approximately once per week. His father-in-law, 74 years old, was an engineer in the 
Indian Air Force. He retired in 1979, and receives a small military pension. He began 
working in the private sector for a ball-bearing manufacturer. He retired in 2000. 
Applicant's mother-in-law is a housewife. Applicant also has cousins in India, but has 
little or no contact with them. (GE 2; Tr. 52-54, 63-64, 69, 72-75) 
 
Applicant's parents own a home in India, but Applicant is unaware of any 
possibility of inheriting it. He has no other property, bank accounts, investments, 
business interests, or connections with Indian companies. He purchased his first home 
in the United States in 2002, and bought his present home in 2009. (Tr. 49, 64-65) 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations for 2006 through 2010 show that he has 
been rated as meeting expectations or above expectations in all categories. He was 
formally recognized for his contributions in 2009. In 2010, his manager described him as 
a team player with an “incredible” work ethic. Letters submitted by Applicant's co-
workers and friends describe him as disciplined, honest, highly trustworthy, and able to 
work efficiently under stressful conditions. The human resources director stated 
Applicant has received numerous awards for his work, and described him as “dedicated, 
honest and loyal.” (AE A-E, G-J, L, N-Q, S) 
 
 Applicant's current supervisor testified that he has worked closely with Applicant 
over the past 18 months. He noted that Applicant has consistently increased the 
company’s efficiency, and he relies on Applicant's expertise. He rates Applicant at the 
top of all those with whom he has worked in the past 20 years. He knew Applicant 
 
 
4
                                                
when he was about to become a U.S. citizen, and commented on Applicant's 
excitement and anticipation. A former co-worker, who has known him for ten years, 
noted that Applicant is “one of the most honest people I’ve had the opportunity to work 
with.” (AE E; Tr. 24-34, 42)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.4 India is a sovereign, socialist, 
secular democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a 
bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Since gaining 
independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, particularly with regard to 
its relations with Pakistan. Within India, sporadic outbreaks of religious riots and violent 
attacks by a variety of separatists and terrorist groups have occurred.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability has 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which 
human rights violations went unpunished.  
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, 
of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment 
which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Governmental 
and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, and the pace of India’s efforts toward 
economic reform, the United States recognizes India as key to its strategic interests 
and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, fighting 
terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia.  
 
India and the United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. 
India has demonstrated its commitment to political freedom. It is seeking a permanent 
seat on the United Nations Security Council. The United States and India recently 
issued a joint statement of their intentions to foster bilateral relations by establishing 
working groups to address strategic cooperation, energy and climate change, 
education, economics, trade, agriculture, science, technology, health, and innovation. 
 
 
 
4 The facts cited derive from the summary and documents contained in Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
 
 
5
                                                
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has close ties to his parents, brother, and parents-in-law, who are 
citizen-residents of India. He is in touch with them about weekly. He visited India in 
2005 and 2008. His mother and his in-laws visit him in the United States as well. His 
father-in-law was a member of the Indian military until he retired in 1979. Such ties 
support a conclusion that a heightened risk of foreign influence exists. Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
 
7
                                                
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.9 Here, Applicant's 
parents, brother, and in-laws live in India. Applicant has frequent contact with them, 
indicating his affection and sense of obligation. Although Applicant's father-in-law was 
a member of the Indian military, he retired more than 30 years ago. The United States 
and India have a long-standing, stable relationship, and share common strategic goals. 
India is a democracy and a partner in combating terrorism. Given the nature of the 
country involved, it is unlikely that the government would exploit him or his relatives 
based on their relationship. Moreover, Applicant has strong ties to the United States. 
His wife and children are U.S. citizens; he and his wife earn substantial incomes 
through their work for U.S. companies; and he has owned two homes here in the past 
ten years. I conclude Applicant would choose these long-standing relationships over 
his ties to India. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for 
exploitation. Here, Applicant has close ties with foreign family members that raise such 
concerns. However, they do not outweigh his ties to the United States. Applicant and 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 099-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
 
8
his wife have lived here for 12 years. His wife and children are all U.S. citizens. 
Numerous friends, co-workers, and his supervisor attest to his honesty and dedication, 
and his exemplary work for the U.S. government over the past nine years. Applicant 
has no business or financial ties to India. He owns a home here, which represents a 
substantial tie to the United States. Given Applicant's family, economic, and social ties 
in the United States, I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
