                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05697 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, 28, has a ten-year history of illegal drug use, primarily marijuana. His 
most recent use of marijuana was in June 2009. He is commended for disclosing his 
illegal drug use in his security clearance application (SCA). Notwithstanding, he has not 
participated in substance abuse counseling or treatment. He presented no evidence of a 
recent diagnosis with a favorable prognosis. In light of his age, his many years of using 
illegal drugs, and the little corroborating evidence about a permanent lifestyle change 
and disassociation from his drug-using friends, I find that the passage of time alone is 
insufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on February 4, 2010. After reviewing the results of 
the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance.  
On December 13, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on January 3, 2011, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 
2011, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on February 15, 2011, convening a hearing for March 1, 2011. At the 
hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
without objection. AE 2 was received post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 8, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old associate consultant working for a government 
contractor. He graduated from high school in June 2001, and attended college from 
August 2001 until June 2006. He received his bachelor’s degree in International 
Development Studies. He is single and he has no children. He has been working for his 
employer since August 2009. Applicant submitted a public trust application in August 
2009, that was denied. He believes it was denied because he disclosed his illegal drug 
use history. He submitted the pending SCA on February 2010, and again disclosed his 
history of illegal drug use. 
 
Applicant started using marijuana illegally at age 16. He continued his use of 
illegal drugs during college and after he graduated from college. He was 23 years old in 
May 2005, when he graduated from college. He estimated he smoked marijuana 
approximately 150 times total. From 1999 to 2001, he used marijuana every three to 
four months. From 2001 to around 2006 (while in college) he smoked marijuana every 
two weeks. From 2007 until 2009, he smoked marijuana once every two months. He 
also purchased marijuana approximately 10 times (every six months) from his college 
friends. He testified that his last illegal drug use (marijuana) took place in August 2009.  
 
Applicant estimated he used cocaine eight times from October 2004 until March 
2009. He used hallucinogenic mushrooms five times from September 2001 to March 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
2008. He used Aderall, without a prescription, from October 2001 until May 2006, as a 
“study aid” to help him focus during his college exams. He illegally used Vicodin three 
times from June 2003 until March 2006, to help him relax and sleep. He obtained the 
above illegal drugs from his friends and used them during social settings. 
 
Applicant has not participated in drug counseling or rehabilitation, and has not 
been diagnosed with substance abuse. He presented no evidence of a recent diagnosis 
or prognosis concerning his use of illegal drugs. At his hearing, he claimed that he no 
longer associates socially with his drug-using friends from high school and college. 
However, he testified that he still has a friendly relationship with his drug-using friends 
from high school and college. He currently maintains periodic telephone, email, and 
personal contact with his drug-using friends. (Tr. 43-44, 53, 56) He averred that the last 
time he was in a place where drugs were being used was in the summer of 2009. 
Applicant stated that his father and one of his supervisors are aware he used marijuana, 
and that he cannot be blackmailed based on that information. 
 
Applicant testified he has abstained from using any illegal drugs since August 
2009, and that he has no intention of using marijuana or any illegal drugs ever again. 
After his hearing, he submitted a written statement of intent promising to never use any 
illegal drugs, or to associate with drug users, with the understanding that any violation of 
his promise would result in the automatic revocation of his clearance. (AE 2). He is 
willing to participate in any type of drug testing to show that he has been abstinent. He 
believes that being candid and forthcoming in his SCA, during his background interview, 
and at his hearing demonstrates his honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Since high school, Applicant has known that the use of marijuana, cocaine, 
mushrooms, and legal drugs without a prescription was illegal. He initially experimented 
with the illegal drugs, and then continued to use them socially because of peer 
pressure. He testified that he stopped using illegal drugs because, as he got older, he 
became concerned about his health and his career. He understands that the illegal use 
of drugs would be detrimental to both. He considers himself a dedicated employee and 
his job is very important to him. He values the work he does for the U.S. Government, 
and it is his desire to serve his country in a full capacity. He no longer has any desire to 
use illegal drugs because he does not enjoy using them, or the way they make him feel. 
 
Applicant’s supervisor and mentor considers him to be a hard worker, dedicated, 
and trustworthy employee. He has known Applicant both personally and professionally, 
and strongly recommends Applicant for a security clearance because of his 
demonstrated dedication and high qualifications. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant has an extensive history of illegal drug use. He started using marijuana 
at age 16, and he used marijuana with varying frequency, from August 1999 until 
August 2009. Additionally, Applicant used cocaine eight times from October 2004 until 
March 2009; he used hallucinogenic mushrooms five times from September 2001 to 
March 2008; he used Aderall, without a prescription, from October 2001 until May 2006; 
and he used Vicodin three times from June 2003 until March 2006. 
 
Applicant stopped using drugs because he wants to pursue a career and is 
concerned about his health. He knows that his use of drugs was illegal, and his 
continued use of drugs would affect his ability to pursue a career. He promised to never 
use illegal drugs again.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a) “any drug abuse”3 and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase.”  
 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. AG ¶ 26(b)(4) 
partially applies because Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Notwithstanding, for the reasons 
outlined in the following paragraphs, this mitigating condition does not fully mitigate the 
security concerns raised by his long-time illegal drug use. Applicant’s abuse of drugs 
spans a lengthy period. His favorable evidence is not sufficient to show he has 
implemented permanent lifestyle changes to prevent his future use of illegal drugs. He 
continues to associate with his high school and college drug-using friends. Not enough 
time has passed for me to conclude that his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. 
His behavior still cast doubts on Applicant’s reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does 
not apply.  
 
  Applicant consumed illegal drugs from 1999 until August 2009. He has not 
participated in any counseling or aftercare treatment program. He presented no 
evidence of a recent diagnosis or prognosis concerning his illegal drug use. In light of 
Applicant’s age, his history of illegal drug use, and the recency of his questionable 
behavior, Applicant’s promise not to use illegal drugs without corroboration (e.g., clear 
evidence of lifestyle changes, statements from those who know him about his 
 
7 
 
 
disassociation from his drug-using friends, or a competent medical diagnosis and 
prognosis) is not sufficient to show his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Considering the ten year period of illegal drug use, the type of drugs he used, and 
his continued association with his long-time drug-using friends, the record evidence is 
not sufficient to demonstrate his intent not to use drugs in the future. I find there has not 
been a sufficient period of abstinence. His past questionable behavior still casts doubts 
on Applicant’s reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the law. 
Applicant’s favorable evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to fully mitigate the 
Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for being 
truthful and forthcoming during the security clearance process. He stopped using illegal 
drugs in August 2009, because he wants to develop a career and is concerned about 
his health. He has an outstanding endorsement from his supervisor. He is considered to 
be a truthful, highly competent, and dependable worker. These factors show 
responsibility, good judgment, and some mitigation. 
 
In light of Applicant’s age and lengthy period using illegal drugs, his promise to 
not use illegal drugs without corroboration is not sufficient to show it is unlikely his 
questionable behavior will recur. On balance, the record evidence fails to convince me 
of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
