 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 10-06913 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 18, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has one debt of over $55,000, which is past due, on a second 
mortgage. The property was sold in a short sale and Applicant thought the sale legally 
satisfied this debt. However, he has begun payments to this creditor and is attempting 
to negotiate a payoff amount. He made a good-faith effort to address the financial 
security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On January 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information that went into effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 1, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 6, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 20, 2011, scheduling the hearing for May 2, 
2011. Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for 
receipt of an additional document. On May 9, 2011, Applicant presented a six page 
post-hearing exhibit marked and admitted without objection as AE E. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 13, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admits allegation 1.a. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a graduate 
degree in electrical engineering. He has been employed in his present position since 
February 2002. He has had a security clearance since 2002, with no security clearance 
violations. He has never been married and has no children. (Tr. 26-28; GE 1.) 
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to one creditor in the 
approximate amount of $55,000. (SOR.) His alleged debt is as follows: 
 
In approximately 2001 or 2002, Applicant purchased a home. He made a down 
payment of 20% of the purchase price and financed the rest of the home through an 
adjustable rate mortgage. He lived in the property for a few years and then converted it 
to a rental property. In 2007, Applicant realized that the interest rate was about to adjust 
upward and sought to refinance the property. He did so through a first mortgage of 
approximately $412,000 and a $55,000 home equity line of credit (HELOC) second 
mortgage on the property. The HELOC loan is the subject of the single allegation on the 
SOR. (Tr. 21-24, 29-45; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) 
 
After the refinance, his new payment was $1,000 more than he was able to rent 
the property for, but still less than it would have been had the interest rate adjusted 
upward on his initial loan. He made payments on the refinanced mortgage and the 
$55,000 HELOC loan for 18 months. However, he was struggling during this time to 
afford the payments. As a result, he decided to sell the property. He listed the property 
with an agent, but the real estate prices in his area were “falling faster than he could 
reduce the price.” He consulted a real estate attorney who advised him to consider a 
short sale. Prior to negotiating a short sale with the bank, Applicant approached his 
division manager, deputy, and his security manager to seek information as to whether a 
short sale could jeopardize his clearance, and he was told that others in his office had 
successfully participated in short sales and were able to keep their clearance. (Tr. 21-
24, 29-45; GE 2; GE 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
On January 20, 2009, Applicant sold the house for $370,000. The payoff for the 
first mortgage was $337,381.41 and satisfied the primary mortgage lender. The HELOC 
mortgage holder received a payoff of $3,163.99 from the sale, as evidenced by the 
seller’s closing statement/HUD statement. Applicant’s attorney and the closing 
documents led Applicant to believe that the payoff sent to the HELOC creditor settled 
the debt and that he was no longer indebted for repayment of the loan. He has 
attempted to contest the debt with the creditor, but to no avail. Applicant has contacted 
the creditor and has reached an agreement with the creditor to accept payments of 
$100 per month until he is able to negotiate a larger lump sum payoff. He provided 
documentation establishing payments from January through April 2011, under this 
agreement. (Tr. 21-24, 29-45; GE 2; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E.) 
 
Excerpts from Applicant’s performance review indicate he “is a hardworking and 
detail-oriented individual who [sic] excited about his research,” and “is a valuable 
member of the [contractor’s] team.” (AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant had one delinquent account listed on his credit reports. The debt 
entered collections and has not been satisfied. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying condition. The burden accordingly shifts to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate these facts and the resulting security concerns. 
 
The guideline includes three conditions in AG & 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant=s financial problems: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The conditions which caused the Applicant’s debt were largely beyond his 
control. His debt is directly attributable to a market downturn, in which the housing 
market suffered. He acted responsibly by listing his house and trying to sell it rather 
than completely defaulting on the mortgages, which he could no longer afford. Based on 
the Seller’s closing statement, which the Applicant provided as AE D, he thought he had 
a reasonable basis to dispute this debt. He acted reasonably, in contacting the creditor 
and arguing his case to the creditor. Despite his belief that he no longer owes anything 
on his HELOC loan, he has set up payments of $100 per month and has successfully 
made payments under this agreement. He has made a good faith effort to resolve this 
debt. The Appeal Board has ruled concerning the successful mitigation of security 
concerns arising from financial considerations, A[a]n applicant is not required to show 
that [he] has completely paid off [his] indebtedness, only that [he] has established a 
reasonable plan to resolve [his] debts and has >taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.=@1 Applicant’s actions with respect to his HELOC loan are reasonable. AG && 
20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) are mitigating. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
                                                          
1ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006)).  
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s debt was caused by unforeseen circumstances beyond his control. 
His honesty and high standards are reflected in the self report he made to his security 
office as he went through the short sale. He is a valued employee and his promises to 
continue to work with his creditor are credible.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
