1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-02715
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I deny Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on November 9, 2009. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on October 27, 2010, detailing security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, that provided the basis for
its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; Tr. 16-17.2
2
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on November 4, 2010. He answered the SOR on
November 17, 2010 and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA
received the request on November 22, 2010, and Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on December 6, 2010. DOHA assigned the case to another administrative
judge on January 10, 2011. For work load reasons, the case was reassigned to me on
March 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 15, 2011, and I convened
the hearing as scheduled on April 6, 2011. The Government offered exhibits marked as
GE 1 through GE 6, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. He did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript
(Tr.) on April 13, 2011. I held the record open until April 21, 2011, for Applicant to
submit additional matters. Applicant did not submit any additional evidence. The record
closed on April 21, 2011.
Procedural Ruling 
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on March 31, 2011, less than 15 days
before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to
receive the notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to
the 15-day notice. (Tr. 9)       
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a-2.c
of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.h of the SOR.  After a complete and thorough review of1
the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant, who is 34 years old, works in physical security for a contractor to the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). He began his employment in
late 2009. Prior to this job, Applicant worked in the railroad industry for 13 years.2
GE 1; Tr. 17, 28-29.3
GE 4; Tr. 34-36.4
GE 2; Tr 17-24, 28-31.5
Id. 17-18.6
3
Applicant graduated from high school in 1995, and he attended college for one
year. He married in 2000 or 2001 and divorced in 2007. He has a nine-year-old son,
who lives with him. When he and his wife divorced, he received full custody of their son.
His wife does not pay him child support. He and his wife agreed that she would retain
their house and her car and that he would keep his car and his railroad pension.3
Applicant currently earns $45,000 a year. His monthly expenses total
approximately $2,300, leaving him with approximately $200 a month for debt payment
and unanticipated bills.4
Financial
The SOR identified eight purportedly continuing delinquencies, as reflected by
credit reports from 2009, 2010, and 2011, totaling approximately $16,458. Some
accounts have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection
agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in both credit reports, in many
instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the same creditor or collection
agency name or under a different creditor or collection agency name. Some accounts
are identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial
account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others
eliminating other digits.
Applicant denied all the debts listed in the SOR. He initially stated that he did not
recognize the creditors or the debts. At the hearing, he agreed that the $10,413 debt in
SOR allegation 1.b may be his former wife’s car. He admitted that he co-signed her car
loan, that she retained the car as part of the divorce, that she agreed to pay the loan,
and that she defaulted on the car loan. He does not intend to pay her debt. He further
admitted that the $222 utility bill in SOR allegation 1.h may be from his marriage and
that he did not remove his name from household accounts after his divorce. The credit
reports indicate that both debts became delinquent before he and his wife divorced, not
after their divorce, as he believed happened with the car loan.5
Applicant has not paid any of the debts listed in the SOR. He indicated that he
disputed the debts with the credit reporting agencies on the computer, but that he did
not receive a response to his disputes. He contacted the original creditor and the
current creditor identified in SOR allegation 1.d ($690). He stated that neither creditor
showed a debt in his name, but he did not provide information verifying his statement.
He has a credit card with the original creditor, but he did not provide information
showing his account is current.6
Id. 17-24.7
GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 27.8
Tr. 25, 32-33.9
Id. 26, 32-33.10
4
Applicant testified that since 2002, he only has had two credit cards. Thus, the
credit cards debts listed in SOR allegations 1.a ($1,572) and 1.c ($644) are unknown to
him. The original creditor and the current collection company for the $1,587 debt in SOR
allegation 1.e are unknown to him. He may have had insurance with the creditor
identified in SOR allegation 1.f ($242), but he does not know. Likewise, he may have
had an account with the telephone company listed in SOR allegation 1.g ($988) many
years ago, but not recently. He has had an account with his current telephone company
for four years.7
Applicant currently uses his credit union for all his loans or credit needs. He
timely pays or paid all his debts with the credit union, as shown on the credit reports.
Applicant has not received a demand for payment from the creditors listed in the SOR
or any other information regarding the debts. The debts in SOR allegations 1.a through
1.c are six to seven years old and the debts in SOR allegations 1.d through 1.f and 1.h
are three to four years old.  8
Criminal Conduct
In 2002, Applicant wrote a $20 check to a retail store which the bank returned for
insufficient funds. The bank also returned a second check for insufficient funds. The
payees on the checks contacted the police, who issued warrants for Applicant on two
theft by check charges, but did not serve Applicant with the warrants in 2002. Applicant
learned about one warrant when he was arrested in 2007. He paid the check and court
costs in 2007, and the court dismissed the warrant.  9
While he was completing his security application, Applicant learned, through his
employer’s security clearance process, about two outstanding warrants. One warrant
related to the second check discussed above, which he resolved immediately. The
second warrant related to his failure to appear in court on a traffic ticket. He
acknowledged receiving a traffic ticket for failure to fully stop at a red light and forgetting
to appear for his court hearing. After learning about this warrant, he paid the fine, and
the court dismissed the warrant.10
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
5
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
6
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
The credit reports of record show that Applicant owes a number of debts, which
he has not paid. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
After receiving the SOR, Applicant made no effort to pay or otherwise resolve the
debts listed in the SOR. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling. He
stated that he disputed the debts because he does not recognize many of the debts
7
listed in the SOR, but he did not provide any documentation showing that he disputed
these debts. He divorced in 2007, but the record does not contain any evidence that the
SOR debts are a result of his divorce. Some debts occurred a long time ago, but other
debts are more recent. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from
his past debts as he has not presented evidence which shows he took any action to
pay, resolve, or challenge the validity of these debts.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern. I have
considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Retailers decided to pursue two small-dollar-value worthless checks written by
Applicant as crimes. The police charged Applicant with theft by check in 2002 and
warrants were issued in 2002. The police arrested him under one warrant in 2007.
When Applicant did not appear for a traffic hearing on a traffic citation in 2008, a warrant
for failure to appear in court was issued. These disqualifying conditions apply.
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have
considered all the mitigating conditions, and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
In 2002, Applicant wrote two checks which the bank returned for insufficient
funds. He was unaware of the problem with his checks or of warrants being issued on
charges of theft by check. He was also unaware that a warrant issued for failure to
appear on his traffic citation. When he learned about these warrants, he paid the fines
and court costs. The bad check incidents occurred nearly nine years ago. He has not
8
written any other checks which the bank returned. His traffic citation is an isolated
incident. Applicant holds a steady job and has worked regularly for the last 14 years. He
has not been involved in any serious criminal activity. He is a single parent, who
provides all the financial support for his son. Overall, the record supports a finding of
rehabilitation and a conclusion that this past conduct is not likely to recur and does not
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns about his past criminal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 200). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
9
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is
a single parent, who works steadily and supports his son. He pays his regular living
expenses and his current debts. However, he  not shown that he has taken steps to
resolve the debts identified in the SOR. He does not recognize many of the debts, but
he did not provide documentation showing that he has disputed these debts with the
credit reporting agencies. His failure to take responsible action towards these debts
raises a security concern about his judgment and responsibility in financial matters.
In 2002, he wrote a $20 check which the bank returned to the retailer. He also
wrote another check with the same result in 2002. Since then, he has not written any
bad checks. He does not have a pattern of writing checks with insufficient funds to buy
items he cannot afford. The problem with these checks occurred a long time ago and
does not raise any security concerns. The traffic violation and subsequent failure to
appear warrant is an isolated incident that is not likely to recur in the future. Applicant is
not a criminal, but rather a hardworking individual who is raising his son alone.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct
under Guideline J, but he has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances
under Guideline F.
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
