KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: In light of Applicant’s use of a hallucinogenic drug after he had been granted an
interim security clearance and after he had completed his security clearance application, the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had failed to demonstrate mitigation is sustainable.  Some of
the Judge’s statements appear inconsistent with his unfavorable decision.  However, viewed in
light of the record as a whole, these inconsistent statements are harmless error.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-03232.a1
DATE: 05/24/2011
DATE: May 24, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-03232
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 17, 2010 DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On March 7, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall,
Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the
Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is 24 years old, has a
bachelor’s degree and is currently enrolled in a master of science program.  He is single and has no
children.  Applicant first experimented with drugs in high school, when he used marijuana a few
times with friends at boarding school.  He ceased using drugs and graduated in June 2005.  As a
college freshmen he used marijuana on a couple of occasions.  In his sophomore year, he was in an
“experimental” mood and he tried marijuana again three or four times.  In sum, Applicant used
marijuana about a dozen times between the ages of 15 or 16 and 21.  He bought it about two times.
Applicant describes his use as stupid immaturity.  In 2008 Applicant started his senior year of
undergraduate school after a summer internship with his current employer.  He believes he may have
signed an acknowledgment of an anti-drug policy, but is unsure.  He knew that he should not use
illegal drugs during his internship and did not use them that summer.  
During the 2008-2009 academic year, Applicant was under considerable study related stress.
Feeling he needed to pull an all-nighter on occasion, he looked into Adderall, a prescription
medication.  It was available from campus peers.  Applicant purchased the medication on three
different occasions from peers who had been prescribed it.  He feels that his use of the substance was
immature and wasn’t really worth it.  In March 2009, Applicant and some friends went to a popular
spring-break venue before graduation.  While there, Applicant used psilocybin mushrooms and
experienced hallucinogenic effects of up to four hours.  Applicant had also used inhalants, largely
in the form of a pressurized air duster, on rare occasions since 2002.  He quit using inhalants upon
graduating from undergraduate school in 2009.  In June 2009, Applicant started his current position.
In October 2009, Applicant completed a security clearance application in which he completely
divulged his past drug use.  In November 2009, Applicant returned to his alma mater to attend a
party.  When psilocybin mushrooms were produced, he again tried the drug.  Since making that
decision, Applicant has expressed great regret about it.
Appreciative of the fact that drug use is incompatible with his profession, Applicant made
immediate changes in his life and gave up on the party scene.  He entered a competitive master’s
degree program and became absorbed in his work.  Applicant has received performance awards and
is given high praise by his superiors.  He has not used illegal drugs since November 2009 and has
no interest in using them again.  He no longer associates with the undergraduate crowd with whom
he once used drugs.  His current ties to his college do not involve persons or activities where drugs
are present.  Applicant’s girlfriend is now drug-free, and she encourages Applicant to lead a drug-
free lifestyle.  Applicant submitted a signed statement confirming that he has not used, bought, or
sold any controlled substances since November 2010.  It is his intention to not use any controlled
substance in the future, and he is aware that he will immediately forfeit any security clearance
granted should he again use drugs.  He knows his employer has a no-drug policy.  His contrition for
his past drug use and his November 2009 lapse is genuine.  He was highly credible in his expressed
intent to refrain from illegal drugs.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: While Applicant’s attempts at rehabilitation
over the past year are highly impressive, there is presently insufficient evidence to establish that the
1Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 26(a).
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.1  Since November 2009, Applicant has refrained from the use of drugs, and has
redirected his focus on his career, health, social activities, graduate education, and other alumni
activities.  He has changed his ways.  He has disassociated himself from drug-using associates and
has avoided the prior environments where drugs were used.  Applicant has been drug-free for less
than 16 months.  Given his age, contrition, personal accomplishments, and impressive record for
taking rehabilitative action during that time with regard to his past drug use, his past use might
otherwise be mitigated as immature folly subsequently overcome by the rigors and responsibilities
of maturity.  However, his use of a hallucinogen within a month of applying for, and being granted,
a security clearance for a position at a major company with an anti-drug policy gives considerable
pause. More time than almost 16 months is needed to demonstrate that an appropriate period of
abstinence applies to his November 2009 lapse.  It is clear that Applicant will not do anything more
to jeopardize his job or career, which can be sufficient by itself to insure that an applicant will not
abuse drugs in the future.  Applicant has submitted a signed statement pledging not to use drugs, and
he is sincere in its expression.  His description of what he has done to rehabilitate himself since
quitting illegal drugs provided sufficient mitigation for his high school and collegiate drug use. His
use of a hallucinogen immediately after receiving a security clearance, however, is cause for
lingering concern about his commitment and ability to remain drug-free.  Accordingly, Guideline
H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.      
Applicant argues that the Judge did not fully take into sufficient account the mitigating
evidence in the case and that the Judge’s rhetoric in discussing various matters in mitigation should
have been the basis for a favorable decision.  Applicant asserts that the Judge improperly focused
on the lapse of time since his last drug use to the detriment of numerous other matters in mitigation.
While Applicant’s arguments point to a flaw in the Judge’s decision, the Judge did not commit
harmful error and his ultimate decision in the case is sustainable.  
The gravamen of the Judge’s ultimate decision was his unease in the face of Applicant’s use
of a hallucinogen in November 2009 after he had left the college environment, entered the work
force, and had been granted an interim security clearance after completing a security clearance
application on which he was required to completely divulge his prior drug use.  The Judge discussed
matters in mitigation extensively in his decision, and, in essence, concluded that, but for Applicant’s
November 2009 lapse, he had overcome the Government’s concerns about his drug use.  The lapse,
coupled with the 16-month passage of time since the incident, provided a reasonable basis for the
Judge to conclude that Applicant had fallen short in his burden to overcome the Government’s case.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
2Decision at  8.
3Decision at  9.
4Compare this decision to the decisions in ISCR Case No. 09-00306 (App. Bd. Nov. 19, 2010) and ISCR Case
No. 97-0351 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 1997), where the Board concluded that inconsistencies in the Judges’ conclusions,
combined with other issues, constituted harmful error.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the seriousness
of the significant disqualifying conduct of relatively recent drug use following the granting of a
security clearance, and considered in detail the possible application of relevant conditions and
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating.  On these facts, under the Egan standard, the Board is not
prepared to conclude that the Judge was required to find that Applicant had overcome the
Government’s security concerns.
Applicant mentions the Judge’s rhetoric employed in the analysis portion of his decision and
suggests that, given this rhetoric concerning matters in mitigation, the Judge should have viewed his
case more favorably.  A review of the Judge’s analysis reveals the Judge reached conclusions that
are inconsistent.  The Judge’s overarching conclusion that an insufficient amount of time has passed
for Applicant to demonstrate a commitment not to use drugs is difficult to square with his statement,
“It is clear that he (Applicant) will not do anything more to jeopardize his job or career, which can
be sufficient by itself to insure that an applicant will not use drugs in the future.”2  Likewise, the
Judge’s conclusion regarding an insufficient period of time since the 2009 lapse is arguably at odds
with his statement, “Applicant has demonstrated contrition over his past drug use, successful
personal rehabilitation, and notable maturation since November 2009.”3  However, the Board does
not measure a Judge’s decision against a standard of perfection.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0608
at 4 (App. Bd. Aug 28, 1997).  Additionally, when reviewing a Judge’s decision, the Board does not
consider individual sentences in isolation from the rest of the decision; rather, the Board considers
the decision in its entirety to discern what the Judge found and concluded.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
02-05009 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 18, 2003).  When the Judge’s decision is considered as a whole, these
inconsistencies do not detract significantly from the Judge’s overall conclusions which are
reasonably consistent and reasonably based on the record evidence.  These inconsistencies,
therefore, constitute harmless error.4   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
                                                Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
