  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04590 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2004 through 2009 federal income tax returns as 
required. In 2007, he had a $38,000 federal tax lien entered against him, which has yet 
to be satisfied. He has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 19, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1 
 In an undated response received on January 5, 2011, Applicant answered the 
SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated March 2, 
2011. The FORM contained 12 attachments (Items). On March 22, 1011, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. 
A response to the FORM is due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on March 21, 2011. As of May 11, 2011, no response had been 
received. On May 12, 2011, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old aircraft electrical mechanic who has worked for a 
defense contractor since September 1997, and seeks to maintain a confidential security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant asserts his financial problems started in 1995, when he went through a 
divorce, which was finalized in 1996. In 1995 and 1996, he was unemployed, living with 
his girlfriend. In 1997, he started working for his current employer. After obtaining his 
current job, he delayed filing his tax returns. In 2003, the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) garnished his wages in the amount of $25,095 for tax years 1995 through 2002. 
(Item 6) The $25,095 federal tax lien entered in December 2003 was released in 
December 2003. (Item 8) He asserts that in 2004 he filed his tax returns for years 1995 
through 2003. (Ex. 6) In March 2007, a $38,754 federal tax lien was entered against 
him. (Item 8)  
 
Applicant had two state tax liens entered against him: in November 2005, a 
$4,508 state tax lien (SOR 1.j), and, in September 1996, a $2,587 state tax lien (SOR 
1.i). (Item 6, 8) In October 2010, he stated he did not believe the amounts listed as 
owing on these liens were correct. He stated he had no plan to resolve these liens and 
his priority is addressing his federal tax debt. (Item 7)  
 
 In April 2004, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. His net monthly 
income was $2,550. (Item 9) His previous year’s annual income was $42,164 and 
$48,321 the year before that. (Item 9) In his bankruptcy, he listed $84,565 in assets and 
$105,677 in liabilities. Secured claims represented approximately $79,000 of the 
liabilities and unsecured debt represented approximately $26,000. (Item 9) His $18,149 
federal income tax debt was listed as an unsecured claim. (Item 9) The state tax liens 
were not listed in his bankruptcy. Pursuant to the bankruptcy, he surrendered his 2002 
Dodge Neon. His unsecured debts were discharged in September 2004. He reaffirmed 
three debts from the bankruptcy: $40,000 (mortgage account), $20,800 (credit union 
account), and $10,800 (credit union account for a 2001 pickup truck). 
2 
 In March 2010, Applicant’s financial problems were discussed during a personal 
subject interview. As of that date, the IRS had an $80 weekly garnishment of his wages. 
His net monthly income was $2,720 and his wife’s monthly net income was $800. Their 
combined monthly discretionary income (net income less expenses and debt payments) 
was $300. (Item 6) In October 2010, he submitted an undated weekly pay statement 
that listed a $184.62 wage attachment. (Item 7) 
 
 On February 18, 2011, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing. (Item 5) In response to section 26, Financial Record, he 
indicated: 26.b, he had property repossessed; 26.d, he had a lien placed against him for 
failing to pay taxes or other debts; 26.e, he had a judgment entered against him; 26.g, 
he had bills turned over to a collection agency; 26.k, he had had wages garnished; 
26.m, he had been more than 180 days delinquent on debts; and 26.n, was currently 
more than 90 days delinquent on debts. He also listed the three accounts he reaffirmed 
following his bankruptcy and a $3,000 county garnishment (SOR 1.n). He also listed a 
$125 collection account (SOR 1.k) and disputed a $150 account (SOR 1.m). In his 
October 2010 response to interrogatories (Item 7), he indicated he had made payments 
on the last two debts, but provided no supporting documentation.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
3 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has no plan to resolve the state 
tax liens entered against him in 1995 and 1996. He failed to file his federal income tax 
4 
returns in a timely manner. He did not file his 1995 to 2002 federal returns until 2004. 
He admitted failing to file his 2004 through 2009 federal returns as required. He 
provided no documentation he has filed these returns. His wages are being attached in 
the amount of $185 weekly. He did not explain where the garnished wages were going. 
He had a federal tax lien and a county tax assessment entered against him. Three small 
collection accounts have yet to be paid. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems have continued for several years and there is no 
reason to believe they will not continue. He should have been more diligent and made 
greater efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. He has failed to carry his burden of 
proving his financial responsibility. Applicant’s financial problems started in 1995, when 
he was unemployed. His 2004 bankruptcy gave him a fresh start. Following his 
bankruptcy, he failed to file his 2004 to 2009 federal taxes as required.2 In 2007, a 
$38,753 federal tax lien was filed against him. His wages are being attached to address 
the federal tax delinquency and to address a $3,000 state tax debt. Applicant has 
provided no documentation that the three minor collection accounts have been paid.  
                                                          
2 Applicant’s debts were discharged in September 2004. His 2004 federal income taxes would not have 
been due until April 2005, which was after the discharge date. Additionally, bankruptcy procedures allow 
discharge of federal income tax liability under limited circumstances, which has not been documented in 
this case.  
5 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors listed under financial 
considerations. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, ongoing, and remain 
unpaid. His continuing delinquent debts constitute a “continuing course of conduct.” 
ISCR Case No. 087-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). There is no evidence he has filed his 2004 to 2009 
federal income tax returns. Since he has failed to file his federal income tax returns in a 
timely manner, I cannot find his financial problems are unlikely to recur. Failing to file 
taxes casts doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant asserted his 1996 divorce contributed to his financial problems, but 
provided no documentation showing how that 14-year-old divorce affects his present-
day ability to repay his delinquent accounts. However, he has been employed by his 
current employer since 1997. He has failed to establish his financial problem were 
largely beyond his control and has failed to show he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. The tax liens were caused by his failure to file his returns. He provided 
no explanation for failing to timely file his taxes. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. Applicant has not had financial counseling, nor are there clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or is under control. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s wages are being attached at the rate of $185 weekly. His pay 
statement does not indicate how much was applied to address his federal or his state 
tax liens, but he stated he had $83 garnished weekly for his federal debt. I do not find 
the attachment to be a good-faith effort to repay his taxes. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
On his e-QIP, Applicant stated he was disputing a $150 collection account, but 
admitted this debt in his SOR answer. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply because the debt has been admitted, and he failed to provide documented 
proof to substantiate any basis for disputing the debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
6 
7 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. In March 2007, a $38,753 federal tax lien was entered against 
him by the IRS. This tax lien would have addressed his delinquent tax liability only for 
tax years 2005 and earlier. There is no evidence Applicant has filed his 2004 through 
2009 federal tax returns, and what tax obligations might arise from those tax years. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all of Applicant’s debts have been paid – they 
have not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant’s federal tax obligation is large, 
but he also has three small collection accounts, which total $430, that remain unpaid. 
His inability to address even these smaller delinquencies raises a concern about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
