 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02669 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on June 1, 2010.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him 
another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on June 2, 2010.3 On 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated December 29, 2009. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 1, 2010). 
 
3 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 2, 2010). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
August 13, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 19, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, dated September 3, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on October 27, 2010, and the case was assigned 
to me on November 9, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on January 5, 2011, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on January 27, 2011.  
 
During the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE 1-3) and two Applicant 
exhibits (AE A-B) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on February 3, 2011.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the factual allegations 
pertaining to alcohol consumption (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d.) of the SOR. Those admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the remaining factual allegations (¶¶ 
1.b. – 1.c.). After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a principal scientist and explosives chemist.4 He is a 1973 high school graduate, with a 
1977 B.S. (cum laude) in chemistry, and a 1982 Ph.D. in organic chemistry.5 He has 
been awarded three patents.6 Applicant was a chemist and principal investigator with a 
private company from November 2003 until September 2008, when he was laid off 
shortly before the company went bankrupt.7 He remained unemployed from September 
4 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), supra note 1, at 15. 
 
5 Tr. at 25; Government Exhibit 3 (Resume, undated), at 2, attached to Applicant’s Answers to the 
interrogatories. 
. 
6 Id. 
 
7 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 16-17. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
2008 until October 2009, when he obtained his current position in another state.8 He 
has never served with the U.S. military.9 Applicant married his wife in May 1990,10 and 
they have one daughter, born in July 1990.11  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant is an alcoholic. He started experimenting with alcohol when he was a 
teenager, or as Applicant describes it, when he was very young.12 He has had only one 
incident involving police authorities when, at the age of 18, in 1973, after consuming 
about four beers at a party, and showing off what his new car could do,13 he was 
stopped by the police and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), later reduced 
to reckless driving. He was fined either $200 or $250.14  
 
The frequency of Applicant’s alcohol consumption varied over the years. From 
1973 until 1981, he characterized himself as an “occasional drinker.” From 1981 until 
February 1998, he was a daily drinker; from February 1998 until August 1998, he was a 
non-drinker; from August 1998 until February 2000, a daily drinker; from February 2000 
until December 2000, an occasional drinker; from December 2000 until December 2006, 
a weekend only drinker; from December 2006 until March 2009, a daily drinker; and 
since March 2009, a non drinker.15 There was a time when Applicant considered 
himself a “big” drinker, and his normal weekday pattern would be to consume a bottle of 
wine and two beers before he went to the gym to work out, and sometimes after the 
workout.16 The weekends saw him consume larger quantities, and during about three 
weekends per month, he would become intoxicated.17 
 
When Applicant was initially laid off in September 2008, he was told it was a 
temporary situation and that he would eventually be rehired. Applicant was depressed, 
and collected unemployment compensation, waited at home, watched television, ate, 
and consumed more alcohol, waiting to be rehired. It was not to be, for the company 
 
8 Id. at 14-16. 
 
9 Id. at 21. 
 
10 Id. at 24-25. 
 
11 Id. at 28. 
 
12 Applicant Exhibit A (Letter from Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW), dated January 13, 2011; Tr. at 
22. 
 
13 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated December 29, 2009), at 2, attached to 
Applicant’s Answers to the interrogatories, supra note 2. 
  
14 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 36-37; Tr. at 38. 
 
15 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 3, 2010, at 2. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 1. 
 
17 Id. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
went out of business.18 His consumption increased to at least one and one-half pints of 
alcohol each day.19 By February 2009, Applicant finally realized that his drinking was 
getting “bad.” Furthermore, his wife urged him to reduce his alcohol consumption.20 
Applicant did some research on-line, and attempted to contact his doctor, but the doctor 
was out of town. Applicant took no further action until the following month.21 
 
On March 6, 2009, Applicant was again intoxicated, and in response to his wife’s 
encouragement, he sought help in an effort to reduce his alcohol consumption. 
Applicant was admitted to the local hospital for acute alcohol withdrawal on March 6, 
2009.22  He had the strong odor of alcohol on his breath.23 Applicant acknowledged to 
the treating personnel that he had a longstanding history of alcoholism with a decade-
long history of alcohol hepatitis and cirrhosis, and that he had been binge drinking since 
he lost his job. Applicant’s blood-alcohol level was over .480.24  He was transferred from 
the emergency department and admitted to the hospital in stable condition.25 Applicant 
remained in the hospital until March 9, 2009. His discharge diagnosis was alcohol 
withdrawal – improved, with the following secondary diagnoses: acute alcohol 
intoxication, alcohol abuse continuous, benign hypertension, and reflux esophagitis.26 
He was advised to follow-up with his primary care physician and also to seek outpatient 
alcohol counseling.27 He was prescribed Campral®, a drug that facilitates abstinence. 
 
Applicant met with his primary care physician on April 1, 2009. The active 
problems assessed were alcohol abuse 305.00 and benign essential hypertension 
401.00.28 They discussed alcoholism, his past history, including his recent 
hospitalization, and his current needs. The doctor decided that Applicant should remain 
on Campral®. 
 
18 Id.; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
19 Applicant Exhibit A, at 1. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 1. 
 
21 Id. 
 
22 Government Exhibit 2 (Hospital records – discharge summary, dated March 27, 2009), at 1, attached to 
Applicant’s Answers to the interrogatories. 
 
23 Government Exhibit 2 (Hospital records – emergency department report, dated April 8, 2009), at 1, 
attached to Applicant’s Answers to the interrogatories. 
 
24 Id., at 2.  
 
25 Id. 
 
26 Government Exhibit 2 (Hospital records – discharge summary), supra note 22, at 1. 
 
27 Id. 
 
28 Government Exhibit 2 (Primary physician report, dated April 1, 2009), at 1, attached to Applicant’s 
Answers to the interrogatories. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
Upon his discharge from the hospital, Applicant started attending two meetings of 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) per day, for a period of 90 days.29 He finally tapered off 
when he obtained his new job and relocated to another state.30 There was a period 
when Applicant did not attend AA meetings, but he resumed doing so on a once-a-week 
basis because the only AA meetings were 40 miles away.31 
 
In December 2010, motivated by DOHA’s concern over his security clearance 
eligibility, rather than a perceived need for treatment,32 Applicant sought evaluation and 
treatment from an LCSW.33 He attends group therapy once each week.34 Applicant’s 
diagnosis and stability of recovery, according to the LCSW, are:35 
 
. . . [Applicant] has appeared motivated to gain insight into and to recover 
from a period of 303.90 Alcohol Dependence, Moderate, With 
Physiological Dependence, in Sustained Full Remission. Since beginning 
our program on 12/02/10, [Applicant] has participated in every group and 
individual appointment he has been asked to attend. He has randomly 
provided urine samples, which have screened negatively for illicit drugs 
and alcohol. 
 
The prognosis is:36 
 
[Applicant’s] self-admission to a Detoxification unit to titrate off alcohol and 
his subsequent period of sobriety are strong indicators of his motivation to 
remain sober. His attendance in a cognitive-based treatment program and 
his ability to internalize the knowledge gained from this program serve to 
strengthen his recovery. 
 
Applicant stopped drinking alcohol on March 6, 2009.37 He has been abstinent 
since that date.38 With his return to work, and the information and guidance received, as 
well as the support from his wife, AA, and his medication, Applicant has come to the 
29 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 2. 
 
30 Tr. at 34. 
 
31 Id. at 34-36; Applicant Exhibit B (AA attendance record, various dates).. 
 
32 Tr. at 35. 
 
33 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
34 Tr. at 35. 
 
35 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
36 Id. at 2. 
 
37 Tr. at 36. 
 
38 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 2. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
conclusion that he can never drink alcohol again.39 Applicant declared: “It will ruin my 
life.”40 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor is very supportive of Applicant’s application for a 
security clearance. He characterizes Applicant as a hard worker who is willing and 
eager to get the job done, dedicated to his work and country, candid, and trustworthy.41 
He noted that Applicant lives a healthy lifestyle and exercises on a daily basis, bicycling, 
swimming, running, and lifting weights.42 Since he has known Applicant, he has never 
seen Applicant consume alcohol, even when other employees are consuming alcohol, 
Applicant only consumes non-alcoholic beverages.43 Applicant’s wife concurs in 
Applicant’s comments about his drinking and abstinence.44 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”45 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”46   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
39 Id.; Tr. at 39. 
 
40 Tr. at 39. 
 
41 Character reference, dated September 7, 2010, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
42 Id. 
 
43 Id. 
 
44 Character reference, undated, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
45 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
46 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”47 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.48  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”49 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”50 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
47 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
48 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
49 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
50 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
At the outset, I note I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of 
Applicant, observe his manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he 
responded to questions, assess his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and 
listen to his testimony. It is my impression that his explanations regarding his alcohol 
consumption status are consistent and have the solid resonance of truth. 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent” is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG ¶ 22(b), “alcohol-
related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired 
condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent” may raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 22(c) 
may apply if there is “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent.” If there is a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence,” AG ¶ 22(d) may apply. Where there is an “evaluation of alcohol abuse or 
alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program,” AG ¶ 22(e) may apply. Under AG ¶ 22(f), a 
“relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program” is potentially disqualifying.  
 
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established. Applicant was stopped in 1973, when at the 
age of 18, he was driving his new automobile in a manner that drew the attention of the 
police. He was charged with DUI, and was found guilty of reckless driving.  
 
AG ¶ 22(b) has not been established for there is no evidence that Applicant had 
any alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job. To the contrary, the only work-
related evidence is that Applicant abstains and only consumes non-alcoholic beverages.  
 
AG ¶ 22(c) has been established. Binge drinking is not defined in the AG, but the 
generally accepted definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
more drinks in about two hours.51 There is substantial evidence of Applicant engaged in 
binge drinking. As for habitual consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
there is also evidence of his doing so on numerous occasions. However, despite there 
being evidence of Applicant’s binge drinking, there is no evidence that his consumption 
of alcohol resulted in impaired judgment. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(d) and 22(e) have been established. Applicant was admitted to the 
local hospital for acute alcohol withdrawal on March 6, 2009, with the strong odor of 
alcohol on his breath. Applicant remained in the hospital until March 9, 2009. His 
discharge diagnosis was alcohol withdrawal – improved, with the secondary diagnoses 
including acute alcohol intoxication, alcohol abuse continuous, and benign 
hypertension. He was advised to follow-up with his primary care physician and also to 
seek outpatient alcohol counseling. He was prescribed Campral®, a drug that facilitates 
abstinence. Applicant met with his primary care physician on April 1, 2009. The active 
problems assessed were alcohol abuse 305.00 and benign essential hypertension 
401.00. They discussed alcoholism, his past history, including his recent hospitalization, 
and his current needs. The doctor decided that Applicant should remain on Campral®. 
In December 2010, Applicant sought evaluation and treatment from an LCSW. 
Applicant’s diagnosis and stability of recovery, according to the LCSW, was essentially: 
to gain insight into and to recover from a period of 303.90 Alcohol Dependence, 
Moderate, With Physiological Dependence, in Sustained Full Remission. The above 
actions by the medical staff at the hospital, the treating physician, and the LCSW all 
qualify as either a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” or an 
“evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” 
 
AG ¶ 22(f) has not been established. While Applicant may have been diagnosed 
with alcohol-related dependence and abuse, there is no evidence that Applicant’s 
diagnosis was after completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” In addition, when “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or 
issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if 
51 It should be noted that the definition for male binge drinking is the consumption of five or more drinks in 
about two hours. The definition of binge drinking was approved by the NIAAA National Advisory Council in February 
2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), 
http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/Newsletter Number3.pdf. This information was not 
offered in evidence by Applicant. I am taking official notice of the information because it addresses the disputed 
inference that Applicant was either engaged in binge drinking or habitual consumption of alcohol under AG ¶ 22(c), 
which I find significant in analyzing the evidence. 
 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
an alcohol abuser),” AG ¶ 23(b) may apply. Evidence that “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 23(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 23(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or 
rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a 
similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.”  
 
AG ¶ 23(a) partially applies. The only alcohol-related incident involving police 
authorities occurred in 1973 when Applicant was 18 and showing off in his new 
automobile after consuming alcohol. He was charged with DUI. The charge was 
subsequently reduced to reckless driving. The remainder of Applicant’s drinking took 
place quietly without incident. He has never appeared intoxicated or impaired at work, 
according to his supervisor, and has never had any other involvement with law 
enforcement or judicial authorities because of his alcohol consumption. Now abstinent 
and armed with knowledge and coping skills developed in his alcohol treatment 
programs, it is unlikely that his alcohol abuse will recur and it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23(b), 23(c), and 23(d) apply. Because of his alcohol treatment and 
counseling programs, including participation in AA, Applicant has moved from “alcohol 
is not a problem” for him to realizing that, yes, it was. He has accepted the information 
and coping skills developed in the alcohol treatment programs and, since March 6, 
2009, has established and maintained a pattern of abstinence. As noted by his LCSW, 
The prognosis is that Applicant’s “self-admission to a Detoxification unit to titrate off 
alcohol and his subsequent period of sobriety are strong indicators of his motivation to 
remain sober.” Applicant’s participation in the alcohol treatment program and his ability 
to use the information gained from the program serve to strengthen Applicant’s 
recovery. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
There is substantial evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. With the 
exception of his early period of abstinence from February to August 1998, and various 
periods of occasional drinking, Applicant’s alcohol consumption has generally been 
daily. On frequent occasions, his alcohol consumption could be characterized as binge 
drinking. His abuse of alcohol caused health issues. His hospital discharge diagnosis 
was alcohol withdrawal – improved, with the following secondary diagnoses: acute 
alcohol intoxication, alcohol abuse continuous, benign hypertension, and reflux 
esophagitis. He was advised to follow-up with his primary care physician and also to 
seek outpatient alcohol counseling. He was prescribed Campral®, a drug that facilitates 
abstinence.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is an alcoholic who has been abstinent since March 6, 2009. While Applicant 
was an alcohol abuser for many years, in March 2009, over two years ago, he turned 
his life around with the decision to seek help. First he received medical treatment for 
alcohol withdrawal and detoxification. He was discharged three days later. Then he 
sought follow-up care with his primary care physician and also obtained outpatient 
alcohol counseling. He attended 180 AA meetings in 90 days, and now is undergoing 
group counseling with an LCSW. With his return to work, and the information and 
guidance received, as well as his support systems, and his medication, Applicant has 
come to the conclusion that he can never drink alcohol again, for to do so would ruin his 
life. Applicant’s current prognosis is good.  
 
I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.52 Applicant’s 
lengthy period of alcohol abuse came to an abrupt halt on March 9, 2009, and has not 
recurred. He possesses a new appreciation of the negative aspects of excessive 
alcohol consumption generally, as well as any alcohol consumption specifically by him, 
and has a support group. Applicant has come to the conclusion that he can never drink 
alcohol again. Applicant’s over two years of abstinence and his favorable prognosis are 
sufficient to mitigate continuing security concerns. See AG && 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the personal conduct security 
concerns.  
52 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
