 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 10-04345 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O‟Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant abused marijuana in high school. She abstained while serving in the U.S. 
military from March 1996 to February 2005, but resumed smoking after she was given the 
drug at a concert by a friend in July 2005. She continued to smoke marijuana until late 
November 2009 on sporadic occasions when socializing with friends or her neighbors. 
Applicant has not used marijuana since she began working for a defense contractor, and 
she intends no future involvement. Clearance granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On September 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), which provided the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny her a security clearance.
1
 DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
                                                 
1 
Applicant‟s middle name was misspelled in the SOR. 
 
 
 2 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on October 8, 2010, and requested a 
hearing. On January 4, 2011, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
On January 6, 2011, I scheduled a hearing for January 25, 2011. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (Ex. 1-2) and two 
Applicant exhibits (Ex. A-B) were entered into evidence. Applicant testified, as reflected in 
a transcript (Tr.) received on February 2, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana from about July 2005 to at least 
December 2009 (SOR 1.a). In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the use of 
marijuana as alleged. She also executed a statement of her intent not to abuse any drug in 
the future with the understanding that her clearance would be automatically revoked for 
any abuse. Applicant‟s admission is incorporated as a finding of fact. After considering the 
pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year old facilities and safety coordinator for a defense contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer since January 2010. (Ex. 1.) Applicant seeks a 
security clearance for unescorted access to a building where classified material is kept. (Tr. 
21.) She has been married since January 2003. (Ex. 1; Tr. 24.) As of January 2011, her 
spouse was unemployed. (Tr. 16.) 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana while she was in high school. (Tr. 27.) After graduation, 
Applicant served in the United States military as a reservist from March 1996 to January 
21, 2004. (Tr. 25.) She worked in the civilian sector as a facilities site planner starting in 
February 1998. (Ex. 1.) In January 2004, she was ordered to active duty. From February 2, 
2004 to February 1, 2005, Applicant was deployed to the Middle East, where she served as 
a platoon sergeant in a combat engineer battalion. Applicant‟s military duties did not 
require her to have access to classified information. (Tr. 27.) Applicant excelled in her 
military duties, and she was given an Army Commendation Medal for exceptional 
meritorious service while deployed. (Ex. B; Tr. 17.) After she returned from deployment, 
she was “stop lossed.” (Ex. 1.) On February 26, 2005, she was awarded an honorable 
discharge. (Ex. B.) She resumed her civilian employment and part-time studies at a local 
community college. (Tr. 26.) She earned her associate‟s degree in August 2006. (Ex. 1.) 
 
Applicant abstained from illegal drug use while she was in the military. She knew the 
Department of Defense does not condone illicit substance abuse. (Tr. 27, 34.) Around July 
2005, Applicant succumbed to peer pressure, and she smoked marijuana while at a 
concert with some friends. (Tr. 27.) She continued to smoke marijuana on occasion within 
this small-knit circle of female friends, with whom she had close relations since their 
 
 3 
freshman year of high school in 1992. Applicant‟s friends shared their marijuana with her at 
a few concerts, a nightclub, and once at a tourist venue. (Ex. 2; Tr. 28.) Once or twice each 
between June 2008 and December 2008, and June 2009 and November 26, 2009, 
Applicant also smoked marijuana with her neighbors while sitting around campfires with 
them. Applicant‟s spouse was present during those occasions, but he did not use any 
marijuana. The marijuana was always given to her by her neighbors or her friends. 
Applicant never purchased the illegal drug herself. (Ex. 2.) 
 
Applicant did not allow her recreational drug use to interfere with her job 
performance or her education. In May 2007, she earned her bachelor‟s degree in business 
management, and in June 2009, her master‟s degree in facilities management. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
17.) In October 2009, Applicant was laid off when her employer for the past 11 years 
closed its plant. Applicant was unemployed from November 2009 to early January 2010, 
when she began working for her present employer. (Ex. 1; Tr. 26.) 
 
On January 19, 2010, Applicant executed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). She listed as character references two of the close 
friends with whom she had smoked marijuana. Applicant responded affirmatively to 
question 23.a concerning any illegal drug use in the last seven years, and she disclosed 
“Sporadic Usage for Recreational Purposes” of marijuana from about July 2005 to 
December 2009. She also answered “Yes” to question 23.c concerning any illegal drug 
possession, purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, 
handling, or sale of any controlled substance in the last seven years. (Ex. 1.) 
 
On March 29, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator for the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), who reported that Applicant began using marijuana in 
around June 2005 with her friends out of boredom and peer pressure. The drug became 
associated with having fun and going to concerts. She estimated her use at once or twice 
every other month between 2005 and 2009. But when she gave specifics, she recalled 
more limited use at three concerts, which were held in 2005, 2006 or 2007, and July or 
August 2008, and two other occasions where she “might” have used marijuana in a car 
with her friends. Applicant also indicated that she smoked marijuana with her neighbors 
once or twice each year in 2008 and 2009, with a last use on November 26, 2009, with her 
neighbors at their campfire. Applicant maintained that she stopped using illegal drugs 
because her current job was important to her, and she denied any intent to use any 
marijuana or other illicit substance in the future. She acknowledged she still had contact 
with the three friends who had shared marijuana with her. She had contact with one friend 
about once a month and with the others around three times a year. Applicant was living in 
the same neighborhood, and had contact once every few months with the neighbors who 
shared their marijuana with her in 2008 and 2009. Applicant declined to provide last names 
for her friends or neighbors. Applicant denied any purchase of the illegal drug herself, and 
attributed her positive response to question 23.c on the e-QIP to her belief that the holding 
of a marijuana joint and passing it to another person constituted trafficking. (Ex. 2.) 
 
On March 30, 2010, Applicant was contacted by the investigator to clarify her 
continued contact with her friends and to provide contact information for her neighbors. 
 
 4 
Applicant declined to disclose the information. (Ex. 2.) In July 2010, Applicant had the 
opportunity to review the investigator‟s report of the interview and subsequent request for 
contact information. She affirmed that the investigator accurately reported the information 
she had provided, and she made no changes. (Ex. 2.) 
 
On October 5, 2010, Applicant submitted to a urinalysis test that was negative for 
illegal drugs. (Ex. A.) In her October 8, 2010 response to the SOR, Applicant executed a 
statement of her intent not to use any illegal drug in the future “in any manner at any point 
while holding a security clearance or otherwise” with the understanding that her clearance 
would be automatically revoked for any violation. She expressed a commitment to 
“voluntarily and immediately” notify the U.S. Government of any violation of this intent to 
abstain from all illegal drug involvement. She volunteered to submit to random drug 
screens, blood or urine, by a party of the Government‟s choosing. With her spouse 
currently unemployed, Applicant indicated that the job was very important to her, and she 
avowed to put her drug use behind her. 
 
At her January 2011 hearing on her security clearance eligibility, Applicant denied 
any use of marijuana since she smoked the drug with her neighbors in late November 
2009. She testified on direct examination that she had stopped socializing with the friends 
with whom she smoked marijuana in the past because she realized it is not in her best 
interest to be with them. (Tr. 17.) On cross-examination, Applicant explained that she was 
not as close as she had been with her old friends (“Now that the children have come into 
their lives, priorities change. I have pursued schooling. They have pursued having children. 
So I guess our paths just didn‟t cross and we went on our own ways.”). (Tr. 28.) However, 
Applicant later acknowledged that she continues to see these friends on “very slight 
occasions, maybe a birthday party,” although she is careful not to put herself in situations 
that could involve illegal drug use. (Tr. 31.) When asked on cross-examination how often 
she used marijuana between July 2005 and 2009, Applicant responded, “I mean, I can‟t 
even count on one hand, because it was so minimal . . . I would say between three and five 
times.” (Tr. 28.) As for the circumstances of that use, Applicant testified that she smoked 
marijuana at the concert in July 2005, “other concerts, nightclub, went to a few concerts 
and then [a tourist venue]. And then the last time being in ‟09 at a campfire.” (Tr. 28.) 
Applicant expressed a willingness to submit to further drug testing, urine or hair sample 
analysis, to prove her abstention since November 2009. (Tr. 18.) Applicant was not asked 
about, and did not offer to explain, the discrepancy between her previously reported abuse 
of marijuana once or twice every other month from around June 2005 to late November 
2009 and her present account of use on a handful of occasions. 
 
 Applicant‟s spouse does not use illegal drugs. He was present when Applicant 
smoked marijuana with the neighbors in November 2009. She testified that her spouse 
“does not like when I do activities such as that.” (Ex. 2; Tr. 33.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
 
 5 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
 6 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person‟s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
2
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” As for the potentially 
disqualifying conditions, AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because of Applicant‟s 
abuse of marijuana from around July 2005 to November 26, 2009. Applicant also used 
marijuana in high school, although that dated use was not alleged, perhaps because the 
Government may not have known about it until Applicant‟s hearing. There is discrepant 
information in the record concerning the frequency of Applicant‟s marijuana use since 
2005. The investigator for OPM reported the frequency of her marijuana use as once or 
twice every other month, which over the 4.5 years, would total two dozen times or more. 
Yet, Applicant then detailed to the investigator involvement that did not approach that level: 
 at three concerts held between 2005 and July or August 2008; on two other occasions in a 
car en route to a nightclub or dinner; and once or twice each in 2008 and 2009 with her 
neighbors. Applicant did not contest the accuracy of the investigator‟s report when given 
the opportunity, and there was no effort to explain the discrepancy at her hearing. Even so, 
her abuse of marijuana was likely more extensive than the three to five times that she 
acknowledged at her hearing. 
 
AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” applies only in that she 
had physical custody of marijuana on the occasions that she smoked it. The evidence does 
not establish that she ever bought or otherwise procured marijuana, provided it to others, 
or kept it around to smoke at a later time with friends or neighbors. 
 
AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual‟s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” does not apply to 
relatively recent substance abuse. Applicant applied for her security clearance little more 
than a month after her last use of marijuana. Concerning whether AG ¶ 26(b), “a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,” is established, Applicant has not 
completely terminated her relationships with those friends with whom she smoked 
marijuana in the past. She continues to see these friends on occasions like birthday 
                                                 
2
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 7 
celebrations. Applicant is still a neighbor of the couple with whom she smoked marijuana in 
2008 and 2009 at campfires. AG ¶ 26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using associates 
and contacts,” does not apply. However, her socialization with her friends and neighbors 
has been less frequent and no longer involves any drug abuse. She is careful to avoid 
putting herself in situations where drugs may be present. AG ¶ 26(b)(2), “changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used,” applies. It provides some guarantee 
against recurrence of relapse, given she never sought out or purchased marijuana. As of 
her hearing, Applicant had been free of illegal drugs for around 13 months. During that 
time, she had submitted to a urinalysis which was negative for illicit substances. As 
evidence of a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, it falls a bit short of “an 
appropriate period of abstinence” required for mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b)(3) in light of her 
relapse into repeated marijuana abuse after she had abstained from 1996 to about July 
2005. However, whereas Applicant has committed herself in writing to abstain from all 
illegal drugs, AG ¶ 25(b)(4), “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation,” applies. 
 
Although not explicitly addressed in the mitigating factors, Applicant‟s willingness to 
submit to random urinalysis, blood, or hair sample screens to confirm her abstention, is an 
important factor in her favor. She is not likely to have volunteered for such testing if she 
was actively abusing illegal drugs or intended any future use. Applicant is not likely to 
jeopardize the job that she needs to support herself and her unemployed spouse by using 
marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have to 
consider Applicant‟s poor judgment in using illegal drugs, and the evidence of some 
minimization on her part when she testified about her marijuana use. That said, the 
Government chose not to allege any concerns related to falsification or concealment of 
information. Applicant put the Government on notice of her then very recent involvement 
with marijuana when she applied for a security clearance. She demonstrated an ability to 
abstain from marijuana in the past when it was required of her while she was in the service. 
 
 8 
While her illegal drug use is not to be condoned, it was recreational and certainly of a low 
priority. After her deployment, Applicant focused on her career. She earned her bachelor‟s 
and master‟s degrees while working full-time. Applicant is not likely to jeopardize her 
defense contractor employment, which she needs to support herself and her spouse, by 
engaging in prohibited drug activity in the future. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
