 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-05794 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 24, 2010. On 
December 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 9, 2010; answered it on December 14, 
2010; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on December 20, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
 
2 
 
 
3, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on January 13, 2011. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on February 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing for March 2, 2011. DOHA 
issued an amended notice of hearing on February 17, 2011, rescheduling the hearing 
for March 15, 2011. I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 
1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel 
presented one demonstrative exhibit summarizing the evidence, and it is attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of one 
witness. I kept the record open until April 4, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, 
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX 
A through G are attached to the record as HX II and HX III. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on March 23, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except SOR ¶ 1.e, which he denied. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since April 2004. He was granted a security clearance 
in December 1980, and he worked for a defense contractor until he was laid off in 1994. 
His clearance was administratively terminated when he was laid off. He worked as a 
welder in the private sector until he began his current job. As of the date of the hearing, 
he did not have a clearance. (Tr. 14.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, who has known him for about 10 years, describes him as 
pleasant, considerate, cooperative, and dependable. (AX C.) A coworker and neighbor 
has known Applicant for three years and considers him a conscientious, dependable 
employee with good work ethics. (AX B.)  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from May 1977 to May 1980. He 
served in the Navy Reserve from May 1980 to May 1983. He received an honorable 
discharge.  
 
 Applicant married in July 1982. He and his wife have two adult children, ages 28 
and 24. Their 24-year-old son and his pregnant wife live with them. (Tr. 25.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2001 
and received a discharge in February 2002. (GX 4 at 4.) Applicant could not recall what 
kinds of debts were discharged. He remembered that his daughter was in college at the 
time, but there was no particular event that triggered the bankruptcy, other than an 
accumulation of debts. (Tr. 37-38.) This bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 Applicant and his wife accumulated several delinquent debts after their 
bankruptcy discharge, including debts of $2,620 for a leased car and $19,000 for new 
 
3 
 
 
siding and windows for their home. He told a security investigator that the leased-car 
debt was for excess mileage, but he testified that he surrendered the car because he 
could not afford it. (GX 2 at 7; Tr. 52.) Applicant recently used his federal income tax 
refund to pay the leased-car debt. (Tr. 51-52; GX 2 at 7.) The evidence regarding the 
five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, including the debt for new siding and 
windows, is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,754 – collection account). This collection account was acquired 
from the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f in July 2009. Applicant has been making bi-
weekly $50 payments on this debt since June 2010. (AX D.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,305 – cell phone). In response to DOHA interrogatories in 
October 2010, Applicant stated that he was charged unfair fees, attempted to resolve 
them years ago, and had no success. He testified that he does not intend to pay this 
debt. He has not filed a written dispute with the creditor or the credit reporting agency. 
(Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d ($24,368 – home improvement loan). This debt was incurred when 
Applicant and his wife installed new siding and windows on their home. His credit report 
reflects that the account was opened in November 2006 and became delinquent in May 
2008. (GX 4 at 9.) He testified that the creditor refused to accept partial payments. (Tr. 
46.) In his response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that the creditor offered to settle 
for $16,000 or $600 per month for two years. (Tr. 47-48; GX 2 at 1.) He attempted to 
refinance the debt with another lender but was turned down. (AX G.) He testified he 
tried to make a hardship withdrawal from his 401(k) account but was informed that his 
situation did not qualify as a hardship. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e ($159 – cell phone). Applicant testified he has never had a cell phone 
with the provider alleged in the SOR. He has not attempted to contact the provider. (Tr. 
48-49.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($3,711 – credit card). This debt was acquired by the collection 
company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 49; GX 2 at 1; AX E.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in October 2010. It reflected 
net household income of $3,950, monthly expenses of $1,229, debt payments of 
$3,604, and a net remainder of $345. The debt payments include Applicant’s primary 
home mortgage and a $33,000 home equity loan. (GX 2 at 3.) He testified that his home 
is worth $185,000 and the balance on the first mortgage is $145,000. (Tr. 35.) He 
testified that they used the home equity loan to buy a new furnace and to pay daily living 
expenses. (Tr. 45-46.)  
 
Applicant testified that his food expenses increased by about $200 per month 
and his utility bills increased by about $100 per month after his son and pregnant 
daughter-in-law moved in with them. (Tr. 31-32.) His son is employed but does not 
contribute to the household expenses. His daughter-in-law is not employed. (Tr. 52.) As 
 
4 
 
 
of the date of the hearing, Applicant had about $75 in his checking account, $375 in 
savings, and about $25,000 in his 40l(k) retirement account. (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 Applicant attributed their current financial difficulties to his wife’s loss of 
employment due to illness. (Tr. 38-39.) His wife’s Social Security Earnings Record 
reflects that her taxed social security earnings in 2002 were $25,011. They dropped to 
$18,387 in 2003, $594 in 2004, and zero in 2005. Her earnings increased to $1,860 in 
2006, $9,509 in 2007, $11,945 in 2008, and $13,000 in 2009. (AX F.) His wife testified 
that she suffered a severe knee injury at work in May 2004 and was laid off. She 
received Workmen’s Compensation and eventually received a $20,000 settlement for 
her work-related injury. She was out of work until she found a part-time retail sales job 
in October 2006. She also has had surgery for diverticulitis and a second surgery on her 
injured knee. 
 
 Applicant has never sought financial counseling. He testified that he was 
unaware that he could dispute entries on his credit report. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and five 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 
18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial history, established by his admissions, testimony at the 
hearing, and his credit reports, establishes three disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
“A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s personal debts. Rather, a security clearance adjudication is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in order to 
make a decision about an applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s wife’s job-related injury, serious 
illness, and the resulting loss of income were conditions beyond their control. This 
mitigating condition applies to the delinquent credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
and 1.f, because it affected Applicant’s ability to pay it, and he acted responsibly by 
negotiating and complying with a payment agreement.  
 
 This mitigating condition is not relevant to the two cell phone debts, however, 
because the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is the product of a billing dispute rather than an inability 
to pay it, and Applicant denies that he had a contract with the provider alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. Furthermore, Applicant has not acted responsibly regarding these two debts, 
because he has chosen to ignore them rather than attempt to resolve them. 
 
 The evidence fails to establish AG ¶ 20(b) for the home improvement loan 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, because it falls short of showing that her loss of income caused 
the delinquent debt. His wife’s Social Security Earnings Record shows that her income 
dropped steadily from 2002 to 2005, when it was zero; but the credit report shows that 
the loan for new siding and windows was not opened until November 2006, after she 
returned to work. Applicant testified that the siding and windows were installed about 
three years ago (Tr. 43.) I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is not established for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
 
7 
 
 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling, and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 Applicant has negotiated a payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
duplicated in ¶ 1.f, and he has been making regular payments on this debt since June 
2010. He has attempted to refinance or settle the home improvement loan alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d, but without success. He refuses to pay the cell phone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c, but has never filed a dispute with the creditor or credit bureau. He has never 
contacted the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established 
for the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f, but not for the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not provided documentary 
proof that he has disputed any of the debts. To the contrary, he testified that he was not 
aware that he could dispute any of the debts and did not know how to do it. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. He served honorably in the U.S. 
Navy. He has worked for defense contractors for many years and earned a reputation 
for dependability. He held a clearance for 14 years until it was administratively 
terminated. He is a mature adult, but he is unsophisticated in financial matters and has 
a track record of financial ineptitude. His Chapter 7 bankruptcy was the result of too 
many debts and not enough income. After receiving a bankruptcy discharge, he leased 
a car that he could not afford and undertook a major home improvement that he could 
not afford. Although he has made good-faith efforts to resolve the delinquent home 
improvement loan, he exercised bad judgment by incurring a large debt on his limited 
income, with no financial reserve for emergencies. He used a home equity loan to pay 
ordinary living expenses and now has virtually no equity in his home. His adult son and 
a pregnant daughter-in-law live with him but do not contribute to the family expenses. 
He has no savings for unexpected expenses. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
