 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 10-01903 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nathaniel Siegel, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline 
for financial considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance required for her 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1  
                                                     
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2  
                                                                                                                                                             
 
 On September 20, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns 
addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In her Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized 
on November 3, 2010, Applicant admitted allegation 1.a. and denied the 
remaining four allegations under Guideline F. She also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 10, 2010, 
and the case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on January 11, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
February 2, 2011. During the hearing, I admitted five Government exhibits (GE 1-
5). Applicant and one witness testified. She also offered nine exhibits, which I 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I. I held the record open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documentation. She timely submitted two 
documents, admitted without objection as AE J and K. DOHA received the 
transcript on February 9, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admission in response to the SOR is admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant, 33 years old, earned college credits after high school, but did 
not earn a degree. She has one son, 14 years old. She married in 2009. 
Applicant worked as an office manager and a waitress before entering the real 
estate business in 2003. She worked as a mortgage loan officer until late 2008. 
In February 2009, she began working for a federal contractor as the business 
development manager. She remains with the same company, currently as the 
director of business development and marketing. (GE 1; AE I; Tr. 90-93) 
 
 As a mortgage loan officer, Applicant's income increased dramatically in 
2004 to $98,500 per year. She purchased three properties in 2004: a 
condominium (property A) in March for $109,000; a townhouse in April (property 
B, where she currently resides) for $340,000; and a single family home in 
November (property C) for $467,000. Property values were rising and she had 
renters available to occupy the rental properties. In 2005, Applicant sold property 
A for a profit of $83,000. Her income that year was $190,800. In 2006, Applicant 
earned approximately $209,000. She purchased another unit for $425,000 in 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3  
                                                     
May 2006 (property D). That year, the one-year adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) 
on property C changed and her monthly payment increased by $426 to $3,260 
per month. Applicant considered her investments as a business, and considered 
herself a mortgage professional. She sought advice from a certified public 
accountant and other experts as she made her purchasing decisions. She 
testified that she was not “flipping” properties, because that is defined as selling a 
property after owning it for less than one year, and she held all her properties 
beyond that timeframe. (AE I; Tr. 46-49, 58-59, 89)  
 
 In about 2007, the real estate market began a decline. Applicant’s 
earnings dropped to $63,500. She lost one renter, and evicted another for non-
payment. The value of her rental properties dropped by 70 percent. Her debt 
surpassed her income by more than $2,000 per month. She sought to avoid filing 
for bankruptcy a second time, and used her savings to make up the difference. 
(AE F, I; Tr. 55-56) 
 
 In late 2007, Applicant's sister moved into her home. Applicant's sister is 
mentally challenged, and had also been diagnosed with cancer. She could not 
work consistently, and became Applicant's dependent. The situation further 
depleted Applicant's funds. Her sister remained in her home until January 2009. 
(AE I; Tr. 65-66, 79) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant's income declined to $33,000. She used a line of credit 
to support the family, and also sought a new job. She was hired in late 2008 by 
her current employer at a salary of $87,500, with benefits. She began the 
position in February 2009. In late 2009, she married. (AE I) 
 
 Applicant’s current debt-to-income ratio is less than 30 percent. She and 
her husband have an annual gross income of approximately $260,000. Her 
monthly net pay, combined with monthly income from her spouse and from a 
rental property, total $16,987. Her monthly expenses are $2,736. Her debts 
consist of two credit cards, one car loan, one car lease agreement, and four 
loans (first and second mortgages on two properties). Her monthly payments on 
the debts total $4,220, leaving a monthly net remainder of approximately 
$10,000.3 Her assets include two properties (her home and one rental unit), 
savings, stocks, and cars, amounting to more than $2,000,000. When asked how 
she uses her net remainder each month, she could not state exactly how she 
spends it, except to note that they put it toward several of her husband’s large 
debts, repairs on his rental property, and to build up their savings. (GE 3; AE E, 
G, H; Tr. 85-86, 100-101) 
 
 The debts listed in the SOR total almost $97,482. The delinquencies 
appear in Applicant's credit reports of November 2009 and July 2010. Applicant 
testified that she obtained her credit bureau report before she began the security 
clearance process. (GE 4, 5; Tr. 77) The status of the SOR debts follows. 
3 These numbers reflect updated figures Applicant provided at her hearing.  
 
 
4  
 
• Chapter 7 bankruptcy (allegation 1.a) – Applicant's mother moved to 
another state when Applicant was 15. From that point to age 22, Applicant 
lived with her father. She helped care for him because he had medical 
problems. She helped support her father and her son, and paid the rent for 
two years. At 20 years old, she was making $13,000 per year, and had 
accumulated approximately $14,000 in delinquencies. She was advised by 
an attorney to file for bankruptcy. She filed a chapter 7 petition, which was 
successfully discharged in June 1998. (Tr. 31-33, 75-76) 
 
$         Hospital bill: $610, PAID (Allegation 1.b.) – In April 2008, Applicant was 
covered by health insurance, and visited an emergency room. She paid 
$100, and believed the remainder would be covered by her insurance. 
When the security clearance process began in 2009, she obtained a credit 
bureau report and learned of this debt. She testified that the hospital had 
sent the bill to the address where she lived with her father 10 years 
previously. She considered paying the bill and seeking reimbursement 
from her insurance company, but she decided not to because she 
believed she did not owe the bill. However, on the day after the hearing, 
She contacted the hospital and insurance company. The insurance 
company agreed to a settlement of $488.51. Applicant provided a letter 
from the creditor confirming the settlement amount, but not showing that 
the amount was paid. Applicant stated that she paid the amount and 
provided a confirmation number. (GE 2, 3; AE K: Tr. 33-36, 76-79) 
 
$        Medical debt: $517, DISPUTED (allegation 1.c) – In her Interrogatory 
response, Applicant stated she did not recognize this creditor, and that the 
debt is not hers. At the hearing, she submitted a letter addressed to one of 
the credit reporting agencies, dated April 2010, asking for information on 
the creditor or removal from her report. The letter is unsigned and includes 
no evidence that it was mailed. She also noted in her interrogatory 
response that it does not appear on her current credit bureau report. She 
did not provide a credit report to support this claim. She also provided no 
response from the creditor, and no evidence showing that any credit 
agency is investigating the dispute. (GE 3; AE B; Tr. 36-38) 
 
$   Second mortgage (property C), $95,157, UNPAID (allegation 1.d.) In 
2004, one of the three properties Applicant bought was a single family 
house, which she intended to rent. She paid $467,000. She carried first 
and second mortgages on the home. She rented the house successfully. 
In 2006, The ARM adjusted and her monthly payment rose by $500, but 
she had sufficient funds to cover the increase. In 2007, the value of the 
house decreased significantly. The real estate market dropped, which 
reduced her income from her position as a loan officer. She did not qualify 
to refinance the loan. She contacted the lender for property C, requesting 
 
 
5  
a loan modification or a short sale. However, the lender foreclosed on the 
property in early 2008. (GE 3; Tr. 53, 57-58, 60-61, 70-73) 
 
During her security interview, Applicant told the investigator that the 
second mortgage on property C had been paid through the foreclosure. 
The Trustee’s Deed for the foreclosure lists only the first mortgage 
holder’s name; the second mortgage holder, which is alleged in the SOR, 
is not mentioned. Applicant retained an attorney in January 2011 to 
determine the status of the second mortgage. He has advised her that he 
is not aware of suits to enforce deficiency judgments after foreclosures. 
However, if the lender for the second mortgage did not agree to release 
the loan after the foreclosure, she may be liable for the second mortgage. 
Applicant believes she has sufficient funds to make monthly payments to 
resolve the second mortgage debt. As of the date the record closed, no 
plan was in place to resolve the second mortgage. (GE 2, 3; AE A, L; Tr. 
53, 57-58, 60-61, 70-73, 86) 
 
$        Credit card: $1,198, PAID (Allegation 1.e.) - Applicant thought this credit 
card had been stolen, but later discovered her sister had used it without 
authorization while living with Applicant in 2008. When she contacted the 
lender, she was told she would have to prosecute her sister or pay the 
balance. Applicant decided not to prosecute. The account became 
delinquent in 2009. During her December 2009 security interview, she 
said she stopped making payments in 2008, and was making a settlement 
agreement with the creditor. She did not mention her claim that her sister 
had used the card without authorization. Applicant testified that she paid 
the debt in November 2010. She provided a letter from the law firm 
representing the creditor. It is dated the day of the hearing, and indicates 
that the account has been satisfied. (GE 2; AE J; Tr. 38-39, 66)  
 
Applicant’s friend testified that she has known Applicant for more than 20 
years. She notes that Applicant was her father’s primary caregiver for many 
years. They now see each other about once monthly. She became aware of the 
hearing about two days beforehand, and had not read the SOR. (Tr. 22-30) 
 
Applicant's neighbor, a retired military member, submitted a letter stating 
that she has known her for six years. She has been to Applicant's home, and 
notes that Applicant is trustworthy, and has good character, as well as sound 
judgment. A friend who has known Applicant for six years noted in her reference 
that Applicant “had a rough year when the mortgage industry collapsed” but she 
still paid her debts and did not file for bankruptcy. She notes that Applicant lives a 
modest lifestyle. (AE C) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6  
                                                     
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
policy in the AG.4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in 
¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does 
not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them 
as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to 
classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented 
by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative 
factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) at AG ¶ 18. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. 
Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a 
heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each applicant possesses the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect 
the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
4 Directive 6.3 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 Id. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a 
concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is 
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). The SOR alleges more than $97,000 in delinquent 
debt, of which $95,000 remains unpaid. Applicant has lived a modest lifestyle, 
and there is no indication of frivolous spending. However, her history 
demonstrates a failure to meet several financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant's bankruptcy is 13 years old. However, the four debts listed in 
the SOR are recent, as approximately $95,000 remains unpaid. Her failure to 
make consistent attempts to resolve these debts, until recently, raises questions 
about her reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 
 
8  
 Applicant began her career in the real estate business when the market 
was booming. She purchased properties for investment and was successful. 
However, her business was affected when the real estate market crashed, 
starting in 2007. She was required to support her disabled sister at the same time 
her income had dropped precipitously. She had no way to foresee or control 
these events which played havoc with her finances. Applicant acted reasonably 
in response: she used her savings to make the payments on her properties, and 
avoided filing a second bankruptcy petition; she tried to obtain a loan modification 
on one property, and then procured a short sale; she sought and obtained 
employment in another field, where she is now successful and making a 
substantial salary. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to resolve debts. Applicant has paid 
two small debts, and disputed another. However, she resolved the two debts 
primarily in response to the security clearance process. She stopped making any 
payments on the credit card debt in 2008; but then paid it in November 2010, 
after the security interview about her debts. As to the hospital bill, she learned of 
it in 2009, after reviewing her credit bureau report, and considered paying it and 
seeking reimbursement from the insurance company. However, she decided not 
to pay it. Only after the hearing did she take concrete steps, obtain a settlement, 
and pay the debt. Most significantly, she did not show good faith in relation to her 
large second mortgage debt. It is not credible that a mortgage professional would 
have been unaware that a second substantial mortgage debt had not been 
satisfied. Yet she did not investigate its status or seek to resolve it. Although she 
was on notice that it existed, at least since the beginning of the security 
clearance process, she did not engage an attorney to investigate it until a month 
before the hearing. As of the hearing date, she had no plan in place to resolve 
the $95,000 debt. Applicant's actions do not constitute good faith efforts to 
resolve her debts. AG 20(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes a medical debt of $517, stating that she does not 
recognize it. However, to receive mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e), an applicant must 
provide documentation supporting the reason for her dispute or her efforts to 
resolve it. Here, although Applicant testified that the debt does not appear on her 
most recent credit bureau report, she did not provide the report, or any other 
evidence that the debt had been investigated or resolved in her favor. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented 
and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I 
have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the 
appropriate guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, who has demonstrated character in her 
personal life by caring for her father, supporting and raising her son on her own, 
and caring for her sister for a year when Applicant's finances were limited. Her 
delinquencies amount to more than $95,000, which is security-significant, even in 
light of her substantial income. Many of her steps to resolve her debts were taken 
shortly before the hearing, indicating that she was responding more to the 
security process than to her obligation to satisfy her legitimate obligations. The 
largest debt is the second mortgage on property C, which has been outstanding 
since 2008. Applicant failed to act responsibly when she did not pursue the 
status of her second mortgage. It is not credible that a mortgage professional 
was unaware of an outstanding mortgage debt of almost $100,000. Applicant 
knew or should have known that she had not satisfied this large debt. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
that Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about her suitability for a 
security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.e   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
