                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05921    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized citizen, was 
born in Iran. His parents and five of his eight siblings are citizens and residents of that 
country. Applicant also holds a valid Iranian passport that he used to enter Iran in 2004. 
He failed to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference concerns raised in this 
case. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 24, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of 
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and 
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines known as 
Guideline B for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 10, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 2011. 
He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief or provide a 
response to the FORM. These items, with exception of the SOR (identified as Gov X 1), 
the transmittal receipt letter (identified as Gov X 2)  and the Answer (identified as Gov X 
3), are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 4 and 5. 
  
The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2011.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iran. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was approved. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as attachments to the FORM. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer/scientist who is employed by a defense 
contractor. He previously held a clearance from 1992 to 1999 while working for another 
defense contractor. His clearance became inactive when he changed jobs in 1999. He 
has worked for his current employer since April 2004.2  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States at age 18 to pursue higher education 
and received his undergraduate degree in 1984. Applicant became a naturalized citizen 
in March 1987. His wife of 29 years and his two adult daughters were born in the United 
States.3 
 
 Applicant is from a large family. He is one of nine siblings. His parents, who 
obtained permanent resident status in the United States, are citizens and residents of 
Iran. Applicant’s parents came to the United States in 1990 to live with him. After 
 
2 GE 5. 
 
3 Answer; GE 4. 
 
3 
 
                                                          
receiving their green cards in 1994, his parents returned to Iran because his mother 
became ill and could not obtain access to affordable healthcare in the United States. 
Once her condition improves, his parents anticipate selling their home and returning to 
the U.S. to live with Applicant. Currently, Applicant’s parents continue to reside in Iran. 4 
 
 In addition to his parents, five of his siblings (two brothers and three sisters) and 
one sister-in law are also citizens and residents of Iran. One brother is a dentist, the 
other a retired electrical engineer, his sisters and sister-in-law are housewives. Only one 
of these siblings, the retired electrical engineer and his wife, has been to the United 
States. They have held permanent resident status since at least 2006. His remaining 
three siblings, like Applicant, are naturalized citizens of the United States. 5 
 
 Since immigrating to the United States 32 years ago, Applicant has traveled to 
Iran twice. Only one trip occurred after Applicant became a naturalized citizen. During 
his most recent trip in August 2004, Applicant and his three siblings residing in the 
United States traveled together to Iran for a family reunion. The trip lasted for 15 days. 
Applicant entered and exited the country using his Iranian passport because U.S. 
passports cannot be used to enter Iran. Although Applicant has not returned to Iran 
since 2004, he renewed his Iranian passport in August 2006. This passport will expire in 
August 2011. Applicant plans to renew the passport if the prohibition on using U.S. 
passports to enter Iran continues. He maintains the Iranian passport, and by extension 
his Iranian citizenship, in case he needs to enter the country to visit his parents. 6 
 
 Applicant maintains regular contact with his parents. He telephones them at least 
once each week and speaks to his siblings if they happen to be at his parents home 
when he calls. Otherwise, he does not maintain telephonic or electronic communication 
with his five siblings living in Iran.7 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. Iran is 98% Muslim; the remaining 2% 
is everything else. The United States has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 
1980. In 2008, President Bush stated that “[t]he actions and policies of the Government 
of Iran are contrary to the interests of the United States in the region and pose a 
continuing unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and 
economy of the United States.” Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military 
equipment and other sensitive technology. The United States has defined the areas of 
objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
  
4 GE 4. 
 
5 GE 4-5.  
 
6 GE 4-5. 
 
7 GE 4-5. 
 
4 
 
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. Iran has 
sought to make the United States suffer political, economic, and human costs. Further, 
Iran has engaged in efforts to sow violence and undermine stability in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, including lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for 
hundreds of U.S. casualties. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest” (AG ¶ 
6).  
 
 The country at issue, Iran, is specifically noted for its association with and 
sponsorship of terrorist. Iran also engages in clandestine efforts to illegally obtain U.S. 
military equipment and other sensitive technology. Consequently, given the heightened 
risk associated with that country, a high degree of scrutiny is warranted. 
 
6 
 
                                                          
 
 Applicant’s parents and five siblings are citizens and residents of Iran, a sponsor 
of terrorist activity, a collector of sensitive information, and a country with interests 
antithetical to the United States. AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of, or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” applies. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s assertions that his family is not involved with the government are not 
sufficient to mitigate the foreign influence concerns. An applicant’s relatives’ obscurity 
does not provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances pose a 
risk, when, for example, the relatives are subject to the authority of a regime that is 
hostile to the U.S. and has a dismal human rights record.8 Furthermore, as the Appeal 
Board has observed:  
 
There is no good reason to assume that a foreign country with an 
authoritarian government that has been . . . involved in state-sponsored 
terrorism would have compunctions about exerting influence or pressure 
on its citizens just because they lack prominence or live modest, ordinary 
lives.9 
 
Under these circumstances AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. 
 
8 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009); ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 11, 2007). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 8 (App. Bd. Jul 28, 2005). 
 
7 
 
 Despite Applicant’s significant ties to the U.S., his wife, his daughter, and four of 
his eight siblings, AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply to this case. Applicant’s sense of obligation 
and loyalty to his parents is just as strong. Indeed, Applicant has not renounced his 
Iranian citizenship or surrendered his Iranian passport because he needs to be able to 
visit his parents whenever he feels compelled to do so. 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with at least four of his siblings living in Iran may be 
classified as casual and infrequent. However, his relationship with his parents with 
whom he maintains regular contact and his brother and sister-in-law who consider 
Applicant’s home in the U.S. their own, cannot be classified as such. Therefore, AG 8(c) 
does not apply. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 Under this guideline, “when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.” (AG ¶ 9) Applicant’s use of an Iranian passport to travel to Iran in 2004 triggers 
the application of AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.” 
 
 Applicant’s contention that he used his Iranian passport to enter Iran only 
because use of his U.S. passport is prohibited has little probative value. As the Appeal 
Board noted, “[t]he negative security significance of acts indicative of foreign preference 
is not negated or diminished merely because an applicant engages in those acts for 
personal reasons or for personal convenience.” (ISCR Case No. 99-0254 at 3 (Feb. 6, 
2000)). 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 11 are applicable 
because Applicant has not surrendered the passport. He has stated his intention to 
renew the passport, which expires in August 2011, as long as he is unable to travel to 
Iran using his U.S. passport. 
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. Although Applicant has established significant ties to the 
U.S. in the 32 years he has resided in the United States, 24 of those as a naturalized 
citizen, his ties to family members in Iran remain strong. Applicant’s relationship with his 
parents, one brother and his sister-in-law, all of whom hold permanent resident status in 
the U.S. and reside with Applicant when in the U.S., cannot be dismissed as casual. 
Applicant’s strong connection to his family is also evident in his decision to apply for and 
renew his Iranian passport since becoming a U.S. citizen so that he can visit his elderly 
parents in Iran when needed. Based on these relationships along with the extraordinary 
threat Iran poses to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of United States, 
I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference 
concerns. 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
