 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05449 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 24, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through F, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 1, 2011. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2009. He is applying for a security clearance. He 
had a clearance in the past, but it lapsed. He has an associate’s degree and 
certifications from a trade school. He was married from 1998 until his divorce in 2002. 
He married his second wife in 2002, and they divorced in 2010. He does not have any 
children.1 
 
 Applicant stated his finances were sound until his 2002 divorce. His first wife was 
awarded a car in the divorce. The loan was still in Applicant’s name, but she was 
supposed to make the payments. She did not maintain the payments, and the creditor 
obtained a judgment against Applicant. His attorney advised him to file bankruptcy. 
Applicant and his second wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2005. Included in 
the bankruptcy were debts accrued by his second wife before they married. The 
bankruptcy petition listed under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured Claims, a 
$17,906 loan on a 2004 model car. Under Schedule E – Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Priority Claims, the petition listed $471 owed to the county for taxes. Under Schedule F 
– Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed 25 debts totaling 
$42,077. Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged in May 2005.2 
 
 In order to be closer to his father who was ill, Applicant moved to his current 
geographic location and opened a repair business in 2005. His customers’ income was 
tied to oil prices, which made Applicant’s company also dependent upon oil prices. The 
company was profitable for a few years. When the economy slowed and oil prices rose 
sharply in 2008, he lost much of his business, and a number of his customers did not 
pay their invoices. He closed the business in late 2009. His father’s health problems 
have been persistent, requiring regular treatment. His mother also developed medical 
problems requiring surgery. Applicant helped his parents with the incidental costs of 
their medical problems, including copayments and deductibles. Applicant also had an 
accident requiring medical treatment and time off work. He was unable to pay his bills, 
and a number of debts became delinquent.3 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $30,000. The 
debts were accrued after Applicant’s previous debts were discharged in bankruptcy. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts, except the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($58), 
1.n ($1,139), 1.p ($1,329), and 1.t ($6,737), which he denied. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 29-31, 34-37; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-25, 38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 7. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-33, 36, 39-46, 57-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE B, D-F. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the $58 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The debt was for a 
credit card machine from his business. He stated that he returned the machine. He did 
not submit any documentary evidence supporting the dispute. The debt is listed on the 
most recent credit report in evidence.4  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the credit card company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, but he 
denied owing the amount alleged in the SOR of $1,139. He stated the amount should 
be at least $500 less than alleged, because he had to place a $500 deposit toward the 
card. The credit card company transferred the debt to a collection company. The debt is 
listed on the most recent credit report, showing the amount alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence supporting his dispute.5  
 
 Applicant denied owing the $1,329 debt to a telephone services company, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. He did not submit any documentary evidence supporting his 
dispute. The debt is listed on the most recent credit report.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q alleges an $11,051 charged-off auto loan on a pick-up truck Applicant 
purchased in 2007. The truck has never been repossessed; Applicant still has it. He has 
not made a payment on the truck in more than a year. When he submitted his SF 86 in 
September 2009, he listed the loan as 90 days past due. The credit reports do not 
indicate any payments since 2009. Applicant stated that he is attempting to contact the 
collection company handling the debt to make payment arrangements.7  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the accounting company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t, but he 
denied owing the $6,737 alleged in the SOR. He stated the company overcharged his 
business for preparing the company’s tax returns. He stated the actual amount owed 
should be about $2,500. The debt is listed on the combined October 2009 credit report, 
as reported by Experian. It is not listed on the March 2010 Experian credit report or the 
July 2010 Equifax credit report. I accept Applicant’s partial dispute of this debt, and I 
find that he owes the accounting company $2,500, and not the $6,737 alleged in the 
SOR.8  
 
 I find that the $73 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s is a duplicate of the $76 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a.9 
 
 Applicant has not made any payments toward any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He stated that he owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) about $17,000 for 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 42; GE 4-6. 
 
5 Tr. at 47-48; GE 4-6. 
 
6 Tr. at 48-49; GE 4-6. 
 
7 Tr. at 49-51; GE 1, 4-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 51-53; GE 3-6. 
 
9 Tr. at 51; GE 4-6. 
 
4 
 
back taxes. He has not filed his federal income tax return for tax year 2009. He stated 
that his tax return is complicated because of his business losses. He hired someone to 
prepare his returns, and he anticipated filing both his 2009 and 2010 tax returns by April 
15, 2011. He has not received financial counseling. He stated he is barely making ends 
meet, with an estimated surplus of income over expenses of about $80 per month. He 
has a plan to pay $40 per month toward the $445 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The first 
payment was to be made in April 2011. He anticipated that he would be able to start 
paying his other delinquent debts in about four months.10 
 
 Applicant submitted a character letter attesting to his work ethic, responsibility, 
and honesty.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 34, 45, 53-57, 62-69; GE 4. Applicant’s tax issues were not alleged in the SOR and will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. They will be used in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in 
the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
11 AE C. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant stated that he filed bankruptcy because his first wife did not pay the 
loan on the car she received in the divorce. He attributed his financial problems after the 
bankruptcy to his business, which failed because of high oil prices and the slowdown of 
the economy, his parents’ medical problems, and his second divorce. Those events 
qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has 
been employed since 2009, but he has done nothing of significance to address his 
delinquent debts. He has unresolved tax issues, and he has a vehicle that he has not 
made a payment on in more than a year. There is insufficient evidence for a 
determination that Applicant acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to repay or 
otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. He has not received financial counseling, and 
his finances are not under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am 
unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.n, and 1.p. He did not 
submit any documentary evidence supporting the disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable 
to those debts. He admitted owing the accounting company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t, but he 
denied owing the amount alleged in the SOR of $6,737. He stated the actual amount 
owed should be about $2,500. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the amount of the debt 
exceeding $2,500; it is not applicable to the $2,500 that Applicant admitted owing. AG ¶ 
20(e) is applicable to the duplicate debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s. In sum, I find that 
financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and the circumstances 
leading to his financial problems. However, at this time, his finances are not sufficiently 
in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:   Against Applicant12 
Subparagraphs 1.u-1.v:  Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
                                                          
12 I find against Applicant in the amount of $2,500 only, not the $6,737 alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
