                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03243
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 19, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 7, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On November 4, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on December 22, 2010, and he requested
an administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned on February 7, 2011.  A notice of hearing was issued on
February 11, 2011, and the hearing was scheduled for March 3, 2011.  At the hearing
the Government presented eight exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through
8 that were admitted without objection.  The Applicant called one witness and presented
nine exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through I that were admitted without
2
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The Applicant requested that the record
remain open to submit additional documentation.  The record remained open until close
of business on March 8, 2011.  The Applicant submitted three pages, consisting of two
Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on March 14, 2011.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 31 years old and married with one child.  He is employed with a
defense contractor as a Aircraft Structural Mechanic and is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant denies the three debts set forth in the SOR.  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated January 26, 2010; May 13, 2010; August 3, 2010; and February 4,
2011; reflect that at one point the Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors set
forth in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 2, 5, 6 and 7.)
  
The Applicant served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from
December 1998 to December 2001.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I and Government Exhibit 1.)
The Applicant got married in 2006, purchased a new house that was being built,
and moved into it in April 2007.  At that time, he was earning about $50,000 annually
and his wife, a school teacher was earning about $40,000 annually.  The first mortgage
was approximately $320,000; with monthly payments of about $1,800.00.  The home
equity line of credit was approximately $80,000; with monthly payments of about
$700.00.  The Home Owners Association monthly payment was about $198.25.  The
total combined monthly payment was about $2,700.00.  The house was affordable and
they could comfortably make the payments.  In June 2008, his wife had a baby and she
decided to stay home with her child, instead of go to work, to avoid the cost of child
care.  With the reduced household income, the Applicant started having problems
making the mortgage payments on the house.  He contacted the bank and informed
them of their financial hardship.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  He then applied for a loan
modification.  The bank approved a modification for only the second loan on the house.
(Applicant’s Exhibit F.)  This reduced the amount of their mortgage slightly.  In July
2007, the Applicant purchased a reliable vehicle for his wife.  In November 2008, the
3
Applicant quit his job, with the intent of finding a better one, but was unable to find
employment.  Unable to continue making the car payments, he negotiated with the
finance company and was allowed to return the vehicle without any deficiency.  (Tr. p.
27 and Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  His wife started tutoring on the side to bring in some
money.  
For three months, neither the Applicant or his wife were gainfully employed.
During this period, they lived off of their credit cards, and could not afford to pay the
mortgage on their home.  At one point, the Applicant was delinquent on his house
payment in the amount of $54,940.00.  He was also indebted to the Homeowners
Association (HOA) for delinquent HOA fees in the amount of $5,000. Although the
Applicant and his wife eventually found employment, he realized that he could no longer
afford the house and decided it best to put the house up for short sale.  In March 2009,
they hired a realtor and worked to get the house sold.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  Although
there were several offers on the property, none of them were approved by the bank, and
the property was ultimately foreclosed upon.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
The Applicant received a 1099A and 1099C that indicate that the mortgage loan
in the amount of $78,875.00 was cancelled.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  The Applicant
contacted the lender and was told that the HOA fees were supposed to be assumed by
the buyer of the house and the lien was charged off by the bank.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit B.)  In October 2010, the Applicant and his wife moved into an
apartment where they now live and are paying off their credit card debt.  
In April 2009, the Applicant went back to school to finish his mechanic
qualifications for the job he now has with the defense contractor.  In August 2009, he
started working for a defense contractor.  The Applicant’s wife, who handles the
household finances, has closed all of the credit cards to avoid extra finance fees and/or
late charges, and is making regular monthly payments to the creditors to resolve the
delinquent debt.  (Tr. p. 29.)          
Applicant’s financial statement dated March 6, 2011, indicates that after paying
his regular monthly expenses, he has $400.00 left over at the end of the month.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  The Applicant understands that he must always
live within his means and be fiscally responsible.
Applicant’s wife, who handles the finances in the family, testified that she and her
husband are working on improving their financial situation.  They know that they must
be financially responsible and they are trying to get out of the hole they fell into.  (Tr. p.
30.)
Applicant’s performance evaluation dated April 19, 2010, reflect ratings of
“exceeds” and “meets” performance requirements.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)
Excerpts from the Applicant’s military records that include evaluations and letters
of commendation are all favorable.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)
4
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and,
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
5
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
6
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that the Applicant’s financial difficulties were partially
caused by circumstances beyond his control, namely, his difficulties in finding suitable
employment after quitting his job, and partially by making poor financial decisions.  The
Applicant realizes that he made a very foolish mistake by quitting his job when he did
not have another one.  As a result, he lost his house and accumulated excessive credit
card debt.  He has learned a harsh lesson from this experience.  Since gaining
employment, he has acted responsibly and with integrity under the circumstances.
When he could no longer afford his home, he contacted the mortgage company and
modified the loan.  Realizing that he still could not afford the house, he placed it for
short sale.  He tried to sell the property to prevent the foreclosure, but was
unsuccessful.  
According to the law of the state in which the Applicant’s property was located,
and under the particular circumstances here, he no longer has any liability or any
deficiency or action by the holder of the first or second mortgage.  He did the best he
could under the circumstances, and no longer owns real property.  In addition, he has
closed his credit card accounts and is making payments on a monthly basis to resolve
them.  He is current with all of his other financial obligations, and is not incurring any
new debt.  He has done as much as is humanly possible to resolve his financial
problems.        
Under the particular circumstance of this case, the Applicant has made a good-
faith effort to resolve his past due indebtedness.  Before he quit his job, he had a stellar
financial record demonstrating that he has always paid his bills on time.  He
understands the importance of paying his bills on time and living within his means.  He
also knows that he must remain fiscally responsible in the future.  There is sufficient
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has demonstrated that he can
properly handle his financial affairs and that he is fiscally responsible.  Considering all of
the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
7
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and, 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a  willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including the Applicant’s
favorable performance evaluations and military records.  They mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
8
