 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06480   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Griffith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 28, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 17, 2011, and reassigned to me on March 28, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on April 8, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 3, 2011. 
 
2 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through N, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on May 18, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for about 30 years. He seeks to retain his security clearance, 
which he has held for more than 30 years. He has a master’s degree. He is divorced 
with three adult children.1 
  
 Applicant smoked marijuana about once every two months while he was in 
college from 1972 to 1976. There is no evidence that he used any illegal drugs between 
1976 and 2005. Applicant revealed his marijuana use when he first applied for a 
security clearance in 1977. He received his security clearance. He revealed the drug 
use during subsequent investigations. He submitted a personnel security questionnaire 
in 1988. He wrote: “I smoked marijuana occasionally during my college years between 
1972 and 1976. I have no intention of using illegal drugs in the future.”2 He provided a 
signed statement in 1989, in which he wrote: 
 
I last used marijuana in June 1976 which occurred just prior to my 
girlfriend and I deciding to end our relationship. I then became serious 
about my future life and career. Involvement with marijuana did not fit into 
my future plans. I have not used marijuana since June 1976 and I have no 
intention or desire to use marijuana in the future.3 
 
 Applicant submitted another personnel security questionnaire in 1995. He again 
wrote: “I smoked marijuana occasionally during my college years between 1972 and 
1976. I have no intention of using illegal drugs in the future.” Applicant was interviewed 
for his background investigation a few weeks later. He discussed his drug use in the 
1970s, and he stated that he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future.4 
 
 Applicant went to a concert with a longtime friend and coworker in 2005. The 
friend offered marijuana to Applicant before the concert, and he smoked it. Applicant 
stated that he took one puff of the marijuana from a pipe. In 2007, Applicant and the 
same friend were on a skiing trip to Canada with a few other people. They were skiing 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 51-56; GE 1; AE M. 
 
2 GE 2-4. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 GE 2, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
off the trail when a local guide offered them marijuana, and they smoked it. Applicant 
stated that he again only took one puff of the marijuana from a pipe.5 
 
 Applicant admitted that he knew that illegal drug use was inconsistent with 
holding a security clearance. He was unaware of any requirements that he would have 
to immediately self-report his illegal drug use, but he knew he would have to list the 
drug use the next time he submitted a security clearance application. He knew that 
marijuana use could adversely affect his security clearance, but thought the drug use 
would be forgiven, like his previous drug use in college was forgiven. He listed his 
marijuana use when he submitted his questionnaire for national security positions (SF 
86) in November 2009. He also fully discussed his marijuana use in a March 2010 
background interview and in his responses to DOHA interrogatories. I find that any 
statements by Applicant that the 2005 marijuana use occurred in 2004 or 2006 were 
unintentional.6 
 
Applicant stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs again. His longtime 
friend offered marijuana to Applicant in about 2008, but Applicant declined it. Applicant 
still sees the friend occasionally, most recently about a month before the hearing, but 
the friend has not offered marijuana to Applicant since the 2008 incident. Applicant does 
not know if the friend still smokes marijuana. Applicant has revealed his drug use to his 
employer, coworkers, and his partner, with whom he lives. His partner credibly testified 
that she has not observed him use any illegal drugs, and she disapproves of their use. 
Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs, with automatic 
revocation of his clearance for any violation. He passed several drug tests. He received 
a psychological evaluation from a clinical psychologist in April 2011.7 The psychologist 
concluded: 
 
[Applicant] appears to have used marijuana on a very limited basis, 
regrets that use, feels guilty about it, and feels he has let himself and co-
workers down by creating a situation where his trustworthiness has been 
questioned. He does not appear physically or psychologically addicted to 
marijuana, or anything else. He appears at low risk for future use at this 
time. 
 
Overall, [Applicant] appears to be functioning well, with no signs of 
psychopathology. No follow up treatment of any type is recommended.8 
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations reflect that he is a valued, trusted employee. 
Three witnesses testified on his behalf, and he submitted several character letters 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 57-67, 77-78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-2. Applicant’s marijuana use in Canada violated 
no U.S. laws. Canada’s marijuana laws are somewhat murky and will not be analyzed, except that non-
medicinal marijuana use was not clearly legal in 2007. 
 
6 Tr. at 60-62, 67-68, 72-74, 88-92; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 42-50, 68-83; GE 2; AE F-H, L, N. 
 
8 AE N. 
 
4 
 
attesting to his excellent job performance, responsibility, professionalism, candor, 
trustworthiness, honesty, patriotism, community involvement, work ethic, and integrity 9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 13-50; AE A-E, I-K. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;10  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and smoked marijuana in 2005 and 2007 while holding a 
security clearance. All of the above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
                                                          
10 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana when he was in college. He reported his marijuana 
use when he first applied for a security clearance in 1977. He discussed his marijuana 
use during subsequent security clearance applications and background investigations. 
On several occasions, he stated that he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. 
Despite those statements, Applicant smoked marijuana with an old friend in 2005 and 
2007. He was offered marijuana by the same friend in 2008, but Applicant did not 
accept the invitation. Applicant still sees the friend occasionally, most recently about a 
month before the hearing, but the friend has not offered marijuana to Applicant since the 
2008 incident. Applicant stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs again, and 
he submitted a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs, with automatic 
revocation of his clearance for any violation. There is no bright-line rule for when 
conduct is recent. Applicant has not used illegal drugs in more than four years. He 
appears sincere in his desire to remain drug-free. However, he previously stated that he 
would not use illegal drugs again, and he later smoked marijuana with full knowledge 
that illegal drug use is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. Applicant will 
probably not use marijuana again; however, I am unable to conclude that illegal drug 
use is completely in his past. Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) has limited applicability. He 
does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale. In sum, I 
conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
I considered Applicant’s long and stable work history, his excellent job 
performance, and his favorable character evidence. I found him to be a credible witness 
and tend to believe that he will probably not use marijuana again. However, I have 
lingering doubts. Moreover, even if Applicant never uses illegal drugs again, his illegal 
drug use on two separate occasions while holding a security clearance, knowing it was 
illegal and counter to DoD policy, raises doubts about his current judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. Four plus years of abstinence is not enough to mitigate his 
incidents of extremely poor judgment, disregard for the law, and violation of the trust 
instilled in him while holding a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
