                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-01064
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his criminal conduct, personal
conduct, and finances. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On July 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), implemented by the Department of
Defense (DOD) on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 19, 2010, and requested a hearing.  The
case was reassigned to me on December 8, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on
December 16, 2010. A hearing was held on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of 14 exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
and no exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 29, 2010. 
Procedural Issues
Before the scheduling of the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR
to add ten additional allegations under Guideline F. Under Guideline F, Applicant
allegedly accumulated ten delinquent debts exceeding $21,500. For good cause shown,
the Government’s SOR amendment (which included checked off Applicant answers) was
granted, and Applicant was afforded 32 days to address the new financial allegations.
Department counsel was granted seven days to respond. Within the time permitted,
Applicant supplemented the record with a two-page account summary of his student loan
payments (creditors 3.f and 3.h) and a settlement summary from creditor 3.a of the
amended SOR.  Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs A and B. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant allegedly (a) was charged in June 2005 under Article
85 (sic) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) with (1) desertion-surrendered to
military authorities, (2) desertion, (3) AWOL, and (4) AWOL-surrendered to military
authorities, and he was discharged under other than honorable conditions in lieu of trial
by court martial; (b) was charged in 2007 with (1) DUI Liquor BAC .08 or More 1st and
(2) DUI Liquor/Drugs/Vapors Ist, to which he pled guilty to count (1) and was sentenced
to two days in jail, fined, and ordered to attend an alcohol awareness class; and (c) was
charged in October 2009 with criminal damage deface, pled guilty, and was fined. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his Questionnaire for National
Security Positions (e-QIP) of September 2007 by omitting three charged offenses in
February 2005 (fraud-worthless checks), May 2005 (failure to appear), and June 2005
(driving on a revoked/suspended license). The three charges covered under Guideline J
are incorporated under Guideline E.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed extenuating circumstances and poor judgment contributed to
his criminal charges and attributed his e-QIP omissions to inadvertence and haste.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old engineer technician for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
3
Applicant attended an automotive college between June 2005 and June 2006 and
earned a diploma in June 2006. (GE 1) Applicant has never married and has no children.
He enlisted in the U.S. Army in September 2001 and served on active duty between
September 2001 and June 2005. (GE 1; Tr. 57-58)  In June 2005, he was discharged
from the Army under other than honorable conditions.  (GEs 1 and 8; Tr. 63) Under the
terms of his discharge, he is not eligible for reenlistment. (GE 9)
Applicant’s arrests and charges 
In December 2004, Applicant left his unit without authority (AWOL) and stayed
with friends for several weeks. (GE 2). He turned himself in to his first sergeant in
January 2005. (Tr. 62-63) In June 2005, he was charged under Article 85 of the UCMJ
with the offense of desertion-surrendered to military authorities. (GEs 2 and 10) While
deployed in Iraq, he experienced nightmares over his combat missions and wanted to
run away from the Army. (Tr. 62-63) Soon after he told  his command he wished to get
out of the Army, he was returned to the barracks and remained there until he was
formally discharged in June 2005, in lieu of a trial by court martial. Applicant’s discharge
was granted under other than honorable conditions. (GE 2; Tr. 63)
In October 2007, Applicant and a friend repaired to a local bar where Applicant
consumed three to four beers. (GE 2) After running a red light when returning home, he
was pulled over by local police and administered two field sobriety tests. (GE 2) He
recorded a BAC in excess of .08 percent on the Breathalyzer test administered to him at
the scene. (GE 2; Tr. 64) The detaining police officer then transported Applicant to the
local police station where he administered another Breathalyzer test. (GE 2; Tr. 64-65)
He registered a BAC of .09 percent on this test. (GE 2) Applicant was then cited for DUI
Liquor BAC .08 or More 1  and DUI Liquor/Drugs/Vapors 1 .  st st
When Applicant appeared in court to answer his DUI charges, he pled guilty to
DUI Liquor BAC .08 or More 1  and was sentenced to two days in jail, fined $1,520, andst
ordered to attend 16 sessions of an alcohol awareness class. (GEs 2, 5, and 6) Applicant
spent two days in jail, made payment arrangements of $100 a month, and completed his
alcohol awareness classes in May 2008. (GE 2)  
Applicant was charged with the offense of criminal damage deface in June 2009.
(GE 7)  He and his girlfriend had gotten into an argument, and she locked him out of their
house. (GE 2) In an attempt to get her attention, he knocked on the window (a little hard
in his estimation). A neighbor called the police who later arrested him at his father’s
home for criminal damage deface.  Applicant pled guilty to the offense in August 2009
and was fined. (GE 7)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2003 and 2009, Applicant accumulated numerous credit card and
student loan debts. Credit reports reflect that he defaulted on nine of these accounts
exceeding $20,000. (GEs 11 through 14).  Applicant’s furnished evidence documents his
4
payment in full of one small account not listed in the SOR (AE B) and monthly payments
on his student loan accounts covered by subparagraphs 3.f and 3.h of the SOR.  See GE
3 and AE A; Tr. 75-76. Applicant’s furnished student loan account summary reflects his
account in current status. (AE A) 
Applicant’s loan consolidation claims draw sufficient support from his credit
reports, student loan account summary, and personal testimony to be sufficiently
credible to merit acceptance. See GEs 2 and 11 through 14 and AE A.  Applicant’s
claims that creditors 3.g and 3.j represent the same debt are also sufficiently
corroborated by the creditor reports to warrant acceptance.
Applicant attributes most of his delinquent debts to the lack of monies sufficient to
satisfy the debts listed in the SOR. (GE 2; Tr. 81) While he briefly explored debt
consolidation, he has never sought or obtained debt counseling. (Tr. 82) His repayment
efforts to date have been limited to his student loan accounts and his satisfaction of a
small consumer account. (creditor 3.a) Applicant’s claims that creditors 3.g and 3.j
represent the same creditor are accepted. The amounts are sufficiently similar to reflect
plausible explanations of the debts.  See GEs 3 and 11 through 14.  
Applicant currently nets around $2,600 a month. (GE 3; Tr. 79) His monthly
expenses total less than $2,400. (Tr. 79-80) This leaves him with a small monthly
remainder. (Tr. 80)    
Applicant’s e-QIP arrest omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in September 2007, Applicant admitted his
acceptance of non-judicial punishment for his acknowledged AWOL in 2005, but omitted
three other offenses: a February 2005 fraud-worthless checks conviction and fine, a May
2005 failure to appear charge and fine, and a June 2005 driving on a revoked/suspended
license.  See GEs 2 and 5.  
Applicant attributes his e-QIP omissions to haste and inadvertence. (Tr. 56, 68)
While lacking in detail, his explanations are plausible and sufficiently credible to warrant
acceptance.  He listed the most potentially derogatory charge (his acknowledged AWOL
that resulted in a future enlistment bar). And while the questions asked of him in question
23 of his e-QIP, are clear and straightforward, Applicant does not impress as an
individual interested in withholding information from the Government. He disclosed his
most derogatory charge (i.e., his Article 85 desertion charge) and persuades that his
omissions of his 2005 bad check charge, his failure to appear on the bad check charge,
and his driving on a revoked license charge were not intentional.  
In March 2008, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM). In this interview, he provided a complete arrest history
to the OPM agent that included the three omitted arrests in his e-QIP. (GE 2) The
summary of interview contains issue codes that suggest the agent scheduled the
interview to address Applicant’s criminal arrest history. From the interview summary, it
5
can not be determined whether Applicant was confronted with the arrest information
before he volunteered the information himself.
Applicant did not provide any endorsements or personnel evaluations. His DD
Form 214 lists a number of commendations and medals he earned during his Army
service.  They include an Army Achievement Medal, an Iraq Campaign Medal, an Army
Commendation Medal, a Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, and a National
Defense Service Medal. (GE 8) 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  Although the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct: (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
6
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  AG, ¶ 30.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.” Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial evidence
any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
7
clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the Government to
affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified
information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, consideration must
take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is an engineering technician for a defense contractor with some history of
criminal behavior that resulted in his discharge from the U.S. Army under less than
honorable conditions, and ensuing arrests and convictions.  His actions are a source of
continuing security concerns. Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts and omissions of
other arrests predating the e-QIP he completed in 2007 also raise security concerns.   
Criminal offense and personal conduct concerns
Applicant’s cumulative history of actions that resulted in charges of desertion during
his Army service and eventually a discharge under other than honorable conditions and
convictions from civilian courts raise security concerns covered by Guidelines J and E. On
the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Adjudication Guidelines for criminal conduct (AG ¶ 30) apply: DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecute or
convicted.” 
Because Applicant’s admitted offenses involve judgment lapses, one disqualifying
condition of the personal conduct guideline also applies to Applicant’s situation: DC ¶ 16
(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient
for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered
as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.” Although Applicant’s DUI and criminal damage deface charges are
clearly covered by Guideline J and do not require additional Guideline E coverage, his
acceptance of a discharge under less than honorable conditions more closely mirrors
adverse personal conduct than criminal behavior.
8
While Applicant has not been involved in any arrest incidents since his criminal
damage deface offense of October 2009, his three cited offenses between 2005 and 2009
reflect recurrent conduct without any extenuating circumstances to lessen the security
significance of his actions. By virtue of the terms of his other than honorable discharge, he
is barred from future enlistment. Applicant’s lifetime enlistment bar reflects in unmistakable
terms the seriousness that the Army attaches to his discharge under other than honorable
conditions, and limits the application of any of the mitigating conditions. At this time, it is
too soon to apply MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” to
Applicant ‘s circumstances. Nor has Applicant shown sufficient rehabilitative efforts to date
to merit the application of any of the mitigating conditions of Guideline E.
Both from a consideration of the applicable guidelines, and from a whole-person
perspective, Applicant, at this time, fails to demonstrate he possesses the strength of
overall character and rehabilitation to meet all of the minimum requirements under the
criminal conduct guideline for continued eligibility to hold a security clearance.  
Applicant’s earned medals during his military service in Iraq entitle him to
considerable credit for his service missions in Iraq. However, without any endorsements or
performance evaluations, or other current evidence to consider his overall reliability and
trustworthiness, there is not enough in the record to illustrate what important lessons
Applicant has learned from his unfortunate lapses in judgment, and how he can avert
recurrences. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances, unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through
1.c of the SOR.
Financial issues
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
where the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability to pay
these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines¶ DC 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a history of
not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant attributes most of his delinquent debts to a lack of funds. Without
providing more details of his financial circumstances, only limited application of ¶ MC
20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and ¶ MC 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
9
or separation, and the individual acted responsibility,” of the financial considerations
guideline are available to him.  Neither of these mitigating condition are dispositive. 
Based on his limited repayment efforts, Applicant may claim some benefit of ¶ MC
20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.”  His efforts to date do not reflect a strong enough track  record, though, to
fully apply the mitigation benefits of  ¶ MC 20(d) to Applicant’s situation.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
At this time, Applicant is able to document monthly a year of monthly payments on
his student loan accounts (creditors 3.f and 3.h) and satisfaction of one small consumer
account (creditor 3.a).  However, he provides no evidence of his addressing any of his
remaining accounts or persuasive reasons why he has not been able to do so with the
resources available to him.
From a whole-person standpoint, there is not evidence presented to show that
Applicant is currently living within his means and has his finances under his control.  What
security risks exist on this record and have not been satisfactorily resolved to date pertain
to his still unaddressed debts. Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accumulated debts and the absence of a
sufficiently developed track record to make safe predictions about his ability to satisfy his
remaining debts, Applicant fails to mitigate judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
concerns related to his debts. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 3.b through 3.e, 3.g, and 3.i. Favorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs 3.a, 3.f, 3.h, and 3.j.
Personal conduct concerns over e-QIP omissions
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his numerous arrests and
convictions in the E-QIP he completed in September 2007.  By omitting his past 2005  and
charges and dispositions, Applicant failed to furnish materially important background
information about his criminal history that was needed for the Government to properly
process and evaluate his security clearance application.  DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” has some application to Applicant’s
situation.
10
Applicant’s explanations of his omissions are sufficiently plausible and credible
under all of the circumstances considered to warrant findings and conclusions that the
falsification allegations are unsubstantiated. He listed his potentially most serious offense
(his desertion charge that resulted in his discharge under less than honorable conditions),
and he impressed as an essentially honest and credible applicant. 
Further, Applicant may be credited with prompt, good-faith corrections of his arrest
omissions. Close examination of the 2008 summary of interview reveals that the OPM
agent contacted Applicant in March 2008 (some six months after Applicant completed his
E-QIP) for the specific purpose of discussing his omitted charges and convictions. The
interview summary reveals that Applicant provided prompt answers to the specific
questions asked of him by the investigator.  Whether or not his answers were prompted by
the investigator is unclear.
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s E-QIP omissions, his
ensuing OPM interview corrections, his explanations, and whole-person considerations,
his disclosures are sufficient to enable him to convincingly refute the falsification
allegations. Overall, Applicant’s explanations are persuasive enough to warrant
conclusions that the falsification allegations relative to his E-QIP omissions of his bad
check, failure to appear, and driving on a revoked license charges are unsubstantiated.
Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the falsification allegations covered by
Guideline E. 
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1.c                    Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:             For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:       Against Applicant
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a:                            For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b:      Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c:                           Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d:      Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.e:      Against Applicant
11
Subparagraph 3.f:       For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.g       Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.h:       For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.i       Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.j:       For Applicant
                     
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
