1 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-03008
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s brief involvement with illegal drugs during college is mitigated, as are
two violations of his school’s policy against underage use of alcohol. However, Applicant
deliberately falsified his security clearance application when asked about his drug and
alcohol use. He did so because he was concerned that he would not get his clearance
or his job. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On December 23, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required in connection
with his work for a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued to Applicant interrogatories1 to clarify or augment information in the
background investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation
2 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.
3 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 -7) proffered in
support of the Government’s case.
5 One of the typographical errors in the FORM is that SOR 1.e cross-referenced Applicant’s use of drugs “as
set forth in subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b.” The record requires amendment of SOR 1.e to cross-reference SOR
1.f and 1.g, which actually allege the drug use Applicant omitted from his eQIP. Additionally, SOR 1.h cross-
references the allegation at SOR 1.a for no apparent reason. 
2
and Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to
make a preliminary affirmative finding2 that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On January 19, 2011, DOHA
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if established,
raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines3 (AG) under Guideline
E (personal conduct).
On February 11, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR through a notarized
statement and requested a decision without a hearing. On or about March 9, 2011,
Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of the
Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on March 22, 2011,
and timely submitted a notarized response, which has been included in the record
without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that in November 2006, Applicant
was arrested and charged with possession of drugs, a charge that was dismissed (SOR
1.a); that in January 2008, he was placed on six months of housing probation violating
his college’s alcohol policy (SOR 1.b); that in May 2008, he was charged with another
violation of his college’s alcohol policy and directed to complete an alcohol education
class (SOR 1.c); that he deliberately falsified his eQIP, when he omitted his November
2006 drug arrest by answering “no” to the question at Section 22.e (Have you EVER
been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?) (SOR 1.d); that he
deliberately falsified his SF 86, when he omitted his use of marijuana between 2005 and
2006 (SOR 1.f), and his use of cocaine in 2005 (SOR 1.g).5 The SOR also cross-
referenced his 2006 drug arrest (SOR 1.h) by answering “no” to the question at Section
23.a (In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example,
cocaine,..THC (marijuana, hashish,...). In response to the SOR (FORM, Item 4),
Applicant admitted with explanation all of these allegations. In addition to the facts
established through his admissions, I have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 24 years old and has worked for a defense contractor since June
2009 as an associate design engineer. This is a position that requires him to have a
6 Directive. 6.3.
3
security clearance. Applicant attended college from September 2005 until he graduated
in May 2009. While in college he was twice cited for violating the school’s policy
regarding alcohol. In January 2008, he was cited for having alcohol in his dormitory
room. In May 2008, he was cited for underage consumption of alcohol and was ordered
to complete an alcohol education program. (FORM, Item 6)
On November 3, 2006, Applicant drove his friends to a movie. When he parked
his car illegally, a police officer approached. The officer noticed in plain sight a pipe,
known as a “bowl,” commonly used to smoke marijuana or hashish. After a consensual
search of the car, Applicant was arrested for drug possession (FORM, Item 7), because
the officer determined that the pipe had trace amounts of marijuana. In March 2007, the
charge was dismissed because the pipe had not been tested for illegal substances, and
because one of the passengers in his car admitted the pipe was his and not Applicant’s.
(FORM, Items 6 and 7)
Applicant used marijuana in 2005 and 2006, but decided to stop after his 2006
arrest and out of concern for his school performance. At most, he used marijuana two or
three times a month, and his last use was in November 2006. In 2005, he also snorted
one line of cocaine out of curiosity and in response to peer pressure. Applicant has not
used illegal drugs since 2006 and does not intend any future use. (Id.)
When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in December 2009,
he intentionally omitted his 2006 arrest by answering “no” to eQIP question 22.e. He did
so, in part, because he thought the charge had been expunged. He also admitted that
he was concerned that he would not get his job or his clearance if he disclosed his
arrest. (FORM, Items 5 and 6; Response to FORM) 
Applicant also deliberately did not disclose his use of marijuana and cocaine as
required in response to SF 86 question 23.a. Again, he withheld this information
because he was concerned about the consequences for his job and his clearance. (Id.) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).
4
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15, Guideline E (personal conduct).
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.8 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Personal Conduct
The Government established that three years ago, Applicant twice violated
school rules about alcohol use during his junior year of college; that four years ago he
was arrested for an unsubstantiated drug offense; and that five years ago he
experimented with marijuana and cocaine during his freshman and sophomore years in
college. More importantly, however, the Government established that Applicant
deliberately withheld information about his drug use and the fact that he was arrested.
Such conduct raises security concerns expressed at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
5
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, Applicant’s deliberate falsifications, as alleged in SOR 1.d and
1.e, require  application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). The remaining
allegations have been proven as fact, but the gravamen of this case centers on
Applicant’s willingness to protect his own interests at the expense of the Government’s
interest in being able to make an informed assessment of Applicant’s suitability for a
clearance.
By contrast, the information about which Applicant lied in his eQIP is mitigated
through the passage of time, its infrequent occurrence, and the probability that it will not
recur. However, Applicant has not mitigated the actual false statements in his eQIP. He
did not try to correct his falsifications before investigators confronted him with the results
of their record checks. Also, he did not establish that he was advised by anyone in
authority to withhold the information at issue. Finally, making false statements to any
agency of the United States concerning a matter within its jurisdiction is a violation of
Federal criminal law. More important, it is a fundamental breach of a basic tenet of the
Government’s personnel security programs. Thus, it cannot be considered minor. 
Based on the foregoing, the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification
before being confronted with the facts); AG ¶ 17(b) (the refusal or failure to cooperate,
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual
cooperated fully and truthfully); and AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) do not apply. On balance, Applicant has
not mitigated the security concerns about his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline E. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 24 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. His drug involvement ended at least four
years ago. His two alcohol-related disciplinary infractions occurred three years ago, and
10 See footnote 6, supra.
6
there is no indication of continued alcohol problems. Applicant’s decision to stop using
drugs well before he graduated from college because he was concerned about his
school work reflects good judgment and maturity. However, his decision to lie about his
drug involvement undermines confidence in his judgment and trustworthiness, and
creates doubt about his suitability for access to classified information. A fair and
commonsense assessment10 of all available information shows Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. Because
protection of the national interest is the primary concern here, such doubts must be
resolved against the individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, 1.f - 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
