                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01752 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes 12 delinquent debts, totaling near $71,000, all of which are 
unresolved. He established circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his 
financial problems. Notwithstanding, he presented little evidence to show financial 
responsibility in the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts in the resolution of the 
debts, or a current track record of financial responsibility. There are no clear indications 
that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 25, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
On September 3, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on November 8, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should be 
granted or denied. DOHA issued notices of hearing on November 22 and 29, 2010, 
convening a hearing for December 6, and then December 15, 2010, respectively. At the 
December 15th hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented one witness, and submitted 
exhibits (AE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 28, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.c, and 1.g through 1.o. He 
denied SOR allegations 1.d through 1.f, because he did not recognize the creditors and 
was not sure these were his accounts. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered 
Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old physical security officer employed with a defense 
contractor since August 2009. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 1985 
until October 1989. He achieved the rank of corporal (pay grade E-4), and his service 
was characterized as honorable. He married his spouse in October 1992, and divorced 
her in November 2010. He has two children, ages 17 and 15. Applicant completed his 
bachelor’s degree in May 1993. Additionally, he recently completed approximately two 
years in a business administration program.  
 
In his August 2009 SCA, Applicant disclosed he was having financial problems. 
The ensuing background investigation revealed the 15 delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, totaling approximately $90,000. Applicant admitted, and the credit reports 
confirmed, that 12 of the delinquent debts, totaling approximately $71,000, are his 
delinquent debts. Applicant denied SOR 1.d through 1.f. He stated he did not recognize 
the creditors and was not sure these were his accounts. These three accounts could be 
duplicate collections; however, he failed to present any evidence of efforts to ascertain 
the validity of the debts or to dispute them.  
 
Applicant testified that before 2008, he had good credit and no financial 
problems. He and his wife were working in the housing business and their combined 
income allowed them to live well. He attributed his financial problems to several factors, 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
the 2007-2008 down spiral of the housing market and the U.S. economy, his separation 
and subsequent divorce, a couple of failed business ventures, and his periods of 
unemployment. He was employed from October 1993 until June 2001; unemployed 
from July 2001 until December 2001; employed from December 2001 until December 
2003; unemployed from December 2003 until August 2004; employed from August 2004 
until April 2005; unemployed from April 2005 until June 2007; employed from June 2007 
until September 2007; unemployed from September 2007 until March 2008; employed 
from March 2008 until August 2008; unemployed from September 2008 until May 2009; 
employed during May and June 2009; and unemployed during July 2009. He started 
working for his current employer in August 2009.  
 
Most of Applicant’s periods of unemployment were voluntary. He explained that 
while he was married and the housing market was doing well, his then wife was making 
around $200,000 a year selling real estate. Because they were having problems with 
their teenage children, they decided that he would stay home and take care of them. 
They believed that his wife’s income was sufficient to support the family and pay their 
debts. The only period he was involuntarily unemployed was from September 2007 until 
March 2008, when he was laid off from his job because of the housing market decline. 
He and his wife separated in July 2009. 
 
Applicant and his then wife purchased a home in 2002 together. She purchased 
another home on her own in December 2005. Applicant claimed that most of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were incurred by him and his wife to refurbish3 and 
furnish both homes. Later on, when the housing market took the downturn, her yearly 
income went from $200,000 to around $40,000. They used his credit cards to “survive” 
and to pay for the family’s day-to-day living expenses. One of the homes was 
foreclosed. Applicant’s ex-wife lives in the second home, and it is pending foreclosure 
too. 
 
Applicant’s current take-home monthly income is approximately $1,800. He is 
paying $800 a month in child support. In 2010, he purchased a 2006 vehicle with his 
father’s financial assistance and pays $460 a month. He needed the vehicle to commute 
to his current job. Applicant believes he is doing the best he can do under his current 
financial circumstances. To reduce his financial expenses, he is living with his parents. 
Applicant admitted that he has made mistakes managing his finances. He also admitted 
that he has not done what is required for him to resolve his financial problems. He 
would like to resolve his financial problems, but does not know what to do. He has not 
participated in any financial counseling, and does not follow a budget. He intends to 
consolidate his debts in the future, but is concerned about being ripped off by an 
unscrupulous debt consolidation firm. He is also thinking about taking a second job, but 
he has not taken any action to that effect. 
 
3 SOR ¶ 1.h concerns a $37,000 home equity loan made to upgrade one of the real estate 
properties Applicant and his wife purchased. SOR ¶ 1.j is a $2,600 personal loan Applicant made while 
unemployed. SOR ¶ 1.m is a $6,000 delinquent credit card debt incurred to purchase furniture for one of 
the homes. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant presented no additional information concerning his current monthly 
living expenses or the debts he pays on a monthly basis. Applicant claimed he is trying 
to rectify his financial problems. However, except for his payment agreement to the 
creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j, Applicant failed to present any documentary evidence of 
any debt payments, contacts or negotiations with creditors, debt disputes, or of any 
efforts to otherwise resolve his delinquent SOR debts since he acquired them.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of his direct supervisor. 
Applicant is considered to be a reliable, dependable, trustworthy, and hard-working 
employee. His supervisor recommends him for access to classified information. This is 
his first security clearance application. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
 
5 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges and the evidence established that Applicant owes 12 
delinquent debts, totaling near $71,000, all of which are unresolved. AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potentially applicable conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any mitigating 
condition. His financial problems are ongoing and his evidence fails to show they 
occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt 
on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond his 
control contributing to his inability to pay her debts, e.g., the downturn of the housing 
market and the U.S. economy, his period of involuntary unemployment4 from 
September 2007 until March 2008, and his separation and divorce. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show that he and his wife acted responsibly in 
the acquisition of his debts, that he made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts, or that 
he has a track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. There is insufficient evidence 
about his living expenses and existing debts to make an informed judgment about his 
financial situation. He has not participated in financial counseling, and he is not 
following a budget. Considering the number of delinquent debts, the dates the debts 
were acquired, the aggregate value of the debts, and the limited evidence of efforts to 
resolve his financial obligations, Applicant and his wife were living beyond their financial 
means. Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the 
facts in this case. 
                                            
4 Applicant’s voluntary periods of unemployment do not constitute “circumstances beyond his 
control.” 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his work 
for a government contractor. He is a good father and provides financial support for his 
children. He is a good reliable, dependable, and hard-working employee. Additionally, 
he has established a payment plan with one of his creditors. These factors show some 
responsibility.  
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility. Applicant’s documentary evidence failed to show financial responsibility in 
the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts to resolve his financial problems in a 
timely manner, or a current track record of financial responsibility. Considering the 
number of debts, the aggregate value of the debts, and the reasons why the debts were 
incurred, it appears that Applicant and his wife were living beyond their financial means. 
His failure to address all but one of the SOR debts indicates he is probably financially 
overextended. Considering the record as a whole, at this time, I have doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g - 1.o:     Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
