 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00711    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is indebted to two 
mortgage companies for a property that is in foreclosure. Applicant provided no 
information on the status of the foreclosure or the status of any remaining financial 
obligation he may have to his creditors. He did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from foreclosed 
property. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 13, 2010, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
2 
 
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and 
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as 
Guideline F for financial considerations.    
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 1, 2010. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 6, 2010. He 
did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These items, with 
exception of the SOR (identified as Item 1) and the Answer (identified as Item 2), are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 3 through 6.  
 
In turn, Applicant submitted four responses with documents attached, dated 
October 27, 2010, February 15, 2011, February 28, 2011, and March 28, 2011. These 
responses with their attachments are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
respectively, without objection from the Government.   
 
The case was assigned to me on April 28, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works as a 
software engineer. Employed since July 2009 by his current employer, this is 
Applicant’s first application for a security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he is indebted to two mortgage 
companies for $527,000 on a property that is currently in foreclosure. Applicant 
purchased the property with his now estranged wife in 2006. The couple made timely 
payments until February 2007, when Applicant lost his job. Although Applicant found 
employment relatively quickly, he earned less money, causing his inability to pay the 
mortgages. The record does not indicate when Applicant began to fall behind on his 
payments. As a result, the mortgage companies foreclosed on the home. Nor does the 
record contain information explaining who, if anyone, was living in the property at the 
time of the foreclosure. According to his security clearance application, Applicant moved 
out of the residence in early 2007. In his subject interview, Applicant says that his wife 
also moved out of the property, but he did not indicate when.3 
 
 Applicant made at least one attempt with the mortgage companies to rehabilitate 
the loans. Both lenders rebuffed his efforts. Applicant provided documentation showing 
that as of March 2011, the holder of the second mortgage charged off his loan account. 
                                                          
 
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 2 - 6.  
 
 
3 
 
However, he provided no accompanying explanation about how this action affects his 
obligation to the lender. The home was scheduled to be sold at auction on April 7, 2011. 
Applicant provided no information confirming if the sale actually occurred, and if it did, 
how it affected his obligations.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
4 GE 3; AE A, AE C, AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Due to the loss of a higher-paying job sometime in 2007, Applicant became 
unable to pay his mortgage loans. As a result, the lenders foreclosed on the property. 
To date, foreclosure remains unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Under AG ¶ 20, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:  
20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
 
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 Applicant’s circumstances merit partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Two life 
events beyond his control may have contributed to Applicant’s financial problems: his 
employment issues and his marital separation. Although Applicant made an attempt to 
rehabilitate or modify his mortgages, he has not provided information on his other 
efforts, if any, to resolve these debts. Similarly, Applicant failed to provide any evidence 
explaining what happened with the property after he and his wife moved out. I do know 
if Applicant continued to help his wife pay for the home, if the couple rented the home to 
a third party, or if the couple just walked away. Lacking more substantial information, I 
cannot apply the second prong of AG ¶ 20(b), that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 The lack of information also makes it difficult for me to determine the applicability 
of AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), and (d). AG ¶¶ 20(e) and (f) are not raised by the circumstances of 
this case. While it appears that Applicant had good credit and the ability to maintain his 
financial obligations before he lost his high-paying job in February 2007, I do not if the 
he was stretched to his financial limits when he purchased his home. Consequently, I 
cannot ascertain whether the loss of his home was truly an isolated event caused by his 
change in income or if the change in income just hastened the inevitable. Applicant has 
not submitted any evidence that he has received financial counseling or that the 
financial issues caused by his foreclosure are resolved or under control. He has not 
presented any evidence about the current status of the foreclosure. I do not know if the 
home was actually sold at auction, thus creating a deficiency balance for which 
Applicant is responsible, or if the lenders have forgiven the loan balances as indicated 
by tax form 1099-C. Therefore, I cannot find that he has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve his indebtedness.   
 
 In light of the sparse evidence provided by Applicant, I find that his financial 
problems are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to 
recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. In sum, I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. The limited information has not convinced me that 
Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
6 
 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
