1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-00036
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Over the past ten years, Applicant accrued $85,000 of delinquent debt that
remains outstanding. He also failed to disclose it on his security clearance application.
These issues generate financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns
that Applicant failed to mitigate. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On November 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the  adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the
Department of Defense on December 1, 2006.
 Applicant never legally adopted his daughter, but raised her from childhood.  I am using the term “adopted”1
for ease of reference.
2
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2010, admitting all of the
allegations. He requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to me on January 12,
2011. On February 11, 2011, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for
February 28, 2011. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received six
Government exhibits, marked as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and
Applicant’s testimony. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 8, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old married man with an adult stepson and an adult
adopted daughter.  Applicant has some college education and currently works as a1
security electronics specialist responsible for the installation, repair, and maintenance of
security access systems. (Tr. 17)
During the past ten years, Applicant accrued approximately $85,000 of
delinquent debt including a $37,000 federal tax lien, an $8,000 mortgage delinquency,
two judgments totalling approximately $4,000, two medical accounts, and numerous
credit card delinquencies.
Applicant accrued the tax delinquency (SOR ¶ 1.c) in 2002. His employer failed
to withhold taxes from his paychecks leaving him with a lump-sum amount due at the
end of the year that he could not afford to pay. (Tr. 33) The Internal Revenue Service
filed a lien on Applicant’s property in 2006. Since then, they have been garnishing his
tax refunds. Applicant contends that he has paid down the arrearage to $21,000. (Tr.
33) He provided no supporting documentation. Currently, Applicant’s income tax filings
are up to date. (Tr. 35)
Applicant’s delinquent mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.u) involves a townhouse where he
lived with his wife, stepson, and adopted daughter. In 2006, Applicant purchased
another home. (Tr. 63)  Because his job was substantially closer to the townhouse than
his new home, he kept the townhouse, and lived there from Monday through Thursday.
In approximately 2009, he stopped spending any time at the townhouse, and allowed
his adopted daughter, then a young woman in her early twenties, to live there, provided
she paid the mortgage and the miscellaneous expenses. (Tr. 22)
In January 2010, Applicant discovered that his adopted daughter “trashed” the
townhouse, generating multiple expenses. (Tr. 48) Also, she failed to pay either the
mortgage payments or any of the miscellaneous expenses. 
Applicant then attempted to sell the townhouse, but his efforts were
unsuccessful. (Tr. 50) Next, he sought to refinance the loan. However, the refinance
process stopped after the original creditor assigned the loan to the current creditor. (Tr.
33) Currently, Applicant is considering a short sale, but provided no documentation of
3
any efforts to achieve this objective. Currently, the delinquent mortgage payments total
$8,000. (Tr. 33)
 
The SOR lists two delinquent medical accounts totalling $271 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e)
Applicant disputes these debts, but provided no supporting documentation.
The remainder of Applicant’s delinquent debt is owed to credit card companies.
Applicant attributes the accrual of these delinquencies to stupidity. (Tr. 60) He has
neither organized payment plans, nor retained a credit counselor to help him resolve
these debts.
Applicant failed to list any of his derogatory financial information, as required on
Sections 28 and 29 of his security application that he completed in April 2009. Applicant
was aware of his delinquencies when he completed the security clearance application,
but chose to omit them because “they were so numerous.” (Tr. 52)
  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. In addition to
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18).  
Applicant’s extensive delinquencies trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” I have considered the potentially applicable mitigating conditions and
conclude none apply. Applicant has neither sought credit counseling to address his
delinquencies nor documented any progress toward satisfying them. Similarly, he failed
to provide evidence supporting his dispute of the medical bills appearing on his credit
report. So long as Applicant’s delinquencies are outstanding and unaddressed, he
remains a security risk under Guideline F.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Applicant’s omission of his financial delinquencies from his 2009 security
clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. Applicant’s
explanation that he was aware of his delinquencies, but chose not to include them on
his security clearance application because they were too numerous is not credible. I
conclude Applicant omitted the derogatory information with the intention of concealing it,
and that AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
5
Given the ongoing nature of Applicant’s financial problems, and his uncorroborated
assurances that he will remedy the problem, I conclude that his finances continue to
pose a security concern. Moreover, I remain troubled by Applicant’s omission of these
delinquencies from his security clearance application.  Applicant has failed to mitigate
the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
