                                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 10-05981 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On December 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 1, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on February 11, 2011, and reassigned to me on March 29, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on April 7, 2011. Applicant requested the hearing be done by video-
teleconference because he was in Iraq. The hearing date was coordinated to 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
accommodate Applicant’s schedule and the site availability. I convened the hearing as 
requested by Applicant on April 14, 2010. Applicant was located at a military base in 
Iraq. I was located at the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals headquarters, in 
Arlington, Virginia. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant did not 
object and they were admitted into evidence. The Government requested administrative 
notice be taken of Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I granted the request without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He did not offer any exhibits. The record was held 
open until April 18, 2011, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he 
did, and they were marked as Appellant Exhibits (AE) A through M, and admitted into 
evidence without objections.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 22, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. They are included in the findings of 
facts. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old, married and has three children. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since February 2009. Prior to his current employment, Applicant 
worked for a different federal contractor in 2008.2  
 
 Applicant is of Kurdish heritage and was born in Iraq. He was obligated to join the 
Ba’ath party when he was in school because he had no choice under the ruling Iraqi 
regime. If you were not a member of the Ba’ath party you risked your safety. He was 
conscripted into the Iraqi army in 1989. He served for two years and shortly after the 
start of Operation Desert Storm in February 1991, he deserted from the army. He had 
no further affiliation with the Ba’ath party. No one in the Iraq military or government 
pursued him. He never took up arms against the United States. He was a cook in the 
army. He left and went to live with his family in northern Iraq, where many Kurds 
resided. From 1991 until 1996, he and his family were relatively safe where they lived 
because there was a “no fly zone” protected by the United States and other countries. 
His brother worked for the U.S. Army in the area. After 1996, when the “no fly zone” 
ended, Applicant and his family were in danger from the Sadaam Hussein regime 
because of his brother’s ties with the U.S. military. He and his family fled Iraq and were 
refugees in Turkey for about two months. In September 1996, they were screened, 
interviewed, and then transported to the United States Territory of Guam. They 
remained on Guam for two months and were granted political asylum by the United 
States. Applicant and his family then traveled to the continental United States where 
they established residency.3  
 
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s response to the Appellant Exhibits.  
 
2 Tr. 23, 76-77. 
 
3 Tr. 23-31, 42-43. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant and his wife married shortly before leaving Iraq. They have three 
children, ages 14, 11, and 5. Their eldest was born in Iraq. Applicant’s wife, mother, and 
siblings also immigrated to the United States and were granted political asylum. 
Applicant became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2006. His wife was 
naturalized in 2008. His eldest son wants to change his first name. To avoid confusion 
in the process, they are waiting until the change is completed before applying for 
citizenship for him. His two younger children were born in the United States.4  
 
 Applicant’s father decided to remain in Iraq, even though he was permitted to 
seek political asylum in the United States. He had a job as a real estate broker and 
because of his age he remained. His mother immigrated with Applicant in 1996 and 
received her permanent resident status (green card) after about a year. She then 
decided to return to Iraq with two of her daughters. Applicant talks to his parents by 
telephone and has visited them on his trips to Iraq.5 
 
 Applicant has nine siblings. One of Applicant’s brothers is a citizen and resident 
of Iraq. He is a lieutenant colonel in the Iraqi army. He joined the army in 1982. 
Applicant does not know his brother’s current assignment. His brother also became a 
member of the Ba’ath party while in high school, because it was required by the political 
regime. Applicant will speak to his brother by telephone once or twice a month and 
occasionally by “Skype.” His brother is married and has children.6  
 
 Applicant’s second brother is a naturalized citizen of the United States. He works 
for the U.S. government in Iraq. He has worked there for three or four years. He is 
married and his wife and children are citizens and residents of the United States.7 
 
Applicant’s third brother is a citizen and resident of the United States. He works 
as an electrician and has worked for contractors in Iraq. He is married and his wife and 
children are citizens of the United States. A fourth brother is a permanent resident and 
has applied for citizenship of the United States. He has worked for military contractors in 
the United States. He is not married. A fifth brother is a citizen of the United States and 
worked for a federal contractor for a period of time in Iraq, but now is in the United 
States. He, his wife, and their children are citizens and residents of the United States. A 
sixth brother is a naturalized citizen of the United States. His wife is a permanent 
resident and their children were born in the United States.8  
 
 Applicant’s sister immigrated to the United States in 1996. She obtained 
permanent resident status and later returned to Iraq with her mother. She married an 
4 Tr. 31-41. 
 
5 Tr. 46, 84-86. 
 
6 Tr. 41-45. 
 
7 Tr. 61-63. 
 
8 Tr. 56-61, 63-64. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Iraqi citizen and they have two children. She and her family live in the same town in 
northern Iraq as her parents. Applicant stays in contact with her.9  
 
A second sister of Applicant lives in the United States and is a permanent 
resident. She has applied to become a U.S. citizen and is waiting to be approved. Her 
husband is an Iraqi citizen and resides with her in the United States. Applicant believes 
he may have permanent resident status. He works for the Iraqi government in the 
United States. He is also a Kurd and came to the United States in about 2000. His sister 
went to Iraq and met him; they married, and she sponsored his entry into this country.10  
  
 A third sister is a naturalized citizen of the United States and her husband is an 
Iraqi citizen. They married about four years ago and she is sponsoring him for entry into 
the United States. He presently lives in Iraq. She has three children with her husband, 
who were born in the United States. When her husband’s application is approved, he 
will move to the United States.11 
 
Applicant also has four aunts that live in the same town where his parents and 
siblings live in northern Iraq. When he is in Iraq, he visits his parents, and also other 
relatives that live in the same town.12  
 
 Applicant traveled to Iraq twice in 2001, once in 2006, and twice in 2007 to visit 
his family. Applicant owns a house in the United States. He has no assets in Iraq. He 
considers the United States his home and intends to remain here.13  
 
Applicant has been deployed to Iraq for 22 months. He has been working closely 
with the U.S. military. He was commended by a senior military officer for his 
contributions and efforts in resolving a complicated mission. He also received a letter of 
appreciation for his contributions and hard work while working in an important area that 
was intricate to protection and security in Iraq. His efforts were considered the 
“backbone” of the process and without them the mission would have been negatively 
impacted. His is considered a valuable asset to the accomplishment of the mission. The 
letter specifically stated: “I give you a superb recommendation for all the work done here 
[that] is of high caliber and impeccable quality. You began your mission here at [X] in 
October 2009 and [continue] to be a valued asset.”14 
 
9 Tr. 48-52. 
 
10 Tr. 52-56. 
 
11 Tr. 65-69. 
 
12 Tr. 69-72. 
 
13 Tr. 45-46, 83. 
 
14 Tr. 79-83; AE A and B. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant provided copies of numerous letters of appreciation for his outstanding 
service in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, other training, and exercises.15  
 
Iraq16 
 
 In 2003 Saddam Hussein and his Ba’ath party were removed from power. A new 
freely elected government took office in 2006. Terrorists receiving training from Iran 
continued to endanger the security and stability of Iraq. Foreign terrorists continued to 
flow into the country and Al-Qaeda continued to be a threat.  
 
 The United States State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens of the 
danger of traveling in Iraq and recommends against all but essential travel due to the 
dangerous security situation. Numerous insurgent groups remain active throughout Iraq, 
despite the efforts of the Iraq security forces. The State Department warns of attacks 
against military and civilian targets that include roadside improvised explosive devices 
(IED), mortars, rockets, human and vehicle borne IEDs, and shootings. There is also 
the threat of sectarian violence in the country. Kidnappings continue to occur and the 
targets are foreigners, primarily dual American-Iraqi citizens, Iraqi citizens, and U.S. 
citizens.  
 
 There are reports of human rights abuses, including: misappropriation of official 
authority by sectarian, criminal, and insurgent groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances and torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment. The Iraqi government’s effectiveness in adhering to the rule of law has 
been hampered by ongoing violence, corruption, sectarian bias, and the lack of civilian 
oversight, and accountability. The treatment of detainees under government authority 
has been generally poor. The judiciary is weak, and judicial independence is impaired 
by threats and killings by insurgent, sectarian, tribal, and criminal elements. Security 
threats hinder the ability of citizens to access the courts, and witness intimidation 
continues.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
15 AE C-M. 
 
16 HE I. 
 
6 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”17 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”18 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue.19 
 
Applicant’s parents live in Iraq. He has a brother who lives there and is an officer 
in the Iraqi military. He also has a sister who lives in Iraq and has permanent resident 
status in the United States. Her husband is a citizen and resident of Iraq. Applicant has 
another brother-in-law who is a citizen of Iraq, working for the Iraqi government in the 
United States. Applicant visits these relatives when he is in Iraq. He maintains contact 
by telephone with his parents. These contacts potentially could create a heightened risk 
of foreign influence, exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion 
because of the security concerns in Iraq. In addition, the U.S. State Department warns 
of the dangers for Americans in Iraq. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
  
Iraq is a dangerous country regardless of one’s nationality. Terrorist groups are 
actively engaged. However, Iraq and the United States continue to work closely to 
reinforce its security. Except for Applicant’s brother who is in the Iraqi army, his family 
members’ positions are unlikely to place Applicant in a position of having to choose 
between his family and the interests of the United States. Applicant left Iraq under dire 
circumstances and was granted political asylum. He is now an active participant in the 
United States’ mission in Iraq. His brother was in the army during the Hussein regime, 
and continues his service under the new government, which is allied with the United 
States. His brother-in-law also works for the Iraqi government. Due to the instability of 
the Iraqi government, I find that their positions could potentially place Applicant in a 
position of having to choose between his family and the interests of the United States. 
19 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members 
resided.  
 
9 
 
 
Therefore, I find AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies to those family members who do not have 
government contact, but not to those who have ties to the Iraqi government.  
 
Applicant and his family left Iraq due to the oppressive government. He deserted 
from the Hussein army. He was a refugee in Turkey with his family before being granted 
political asylum in the United States. He has a large extended family, most of whom are 
citizens or permanent residents of the United States, as is his immediate family. 
Applicant has been working with the military in Iraq in support of the United States’ 
mission. I found Applicant to be candid, sincere, and credible. He has documented to 
me, through his actions as expressed by those who served with him and his testimony, 
that since moving to the United States in 1996, he has a deep and longstanding 
relationship and loyalty to the United States. I am convinced that he would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Applicant and many of his family sought political asylum in the United States, 
from the Hussein regime, which treated the Kurdish population horrifically. The regime 
is no longer in power and some of his family remains in Iraq. His father and mother both 
live there. They do not have ties to the government. His brother is an officer in the Iraqi 
army and one of his sisters lives in Iraq with her family. He also has a brother who is a 
U.S. citizen and who works for the United States government in Iraq. His brother-in-law 
also works for the Iraqi government in the United States. Applicant maintains regular 
contact with these family members, such that it cannot be considered casual. 
Applicant’s immediate family and his remaining six siblings are either citizens of the 
United States or permanent residents residing in the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(c) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
familial ties in both Iraq and the United States. I have considered the circumstances 
under which he left Iraq and his commitment to the United States since being granted 
political asylum. His wife and two of his children are U.S. citizens.20 Applicant has no 
financial ties to Iraq. He has a large extended family, most of whom are citizens or 
permanent residents living in the United States. He has been deployed to Iraq for 
sixteen months and has been an integral part of the military’s mission while there. The 
Appeal Board has held that “generally an applicant’s statements by themselves, as to 
what he [or she] would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are 
entitled to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”21 He does have some familial ties in Iraq, but in the 
unlikely event there is a conflict of interest, I am convinced, by his demonstrated 
commitment to the United States, that he would resolve any conflicts in its favor. 
Overall, the record evidence does not leave me with questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
20 His eldest son will become a U.S. citizen after he changes his name.  
 
21 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007) 
