 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00189 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rashid Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 8, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 17, 2011. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 24, 2011. On April 1, 
2011, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for April 18, 2011. The 
case was transferred to me on April 11, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled on 
April 18, 2011. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. Applicant testified and offered five  
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - E. The record was held 
open until May 3, 2011, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
timely submitted a document which was admitted as AE F. Department Counsel’s 
response to the submission of AE F is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. No additional 
documents were submitted. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 22, 2011.  Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He denies SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since June 2007. 
He is married, but pending divorce proceedings. He and his wife have three children, 
ages 14, 20, and 21. (Tr. 6-11, 29-30; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he has 
several delinquent debts. The SOR alleged four delinquent accounts. They include a 
$25,555 line of credit taken out in June 2007 that was placed for collection (Gov 4 at 6; 
Gov 5 at 2); a $2,889 credit card account opened in April 2008, and placed for collection 
in February 2009 (Gov 4 at 9; Gov 5 at 2); a $63,906 second mortgage on a house that 
was foreclosed in December 2007 that was placed for collection in June 2009 (Gov 4 at 
9; Gov 5 at 2); and a $138 electric utility account placed for collection in July 2010 (Gov 
4 at 10, 12; Gov 5 at 2).  
 
Although not alleged in the SOR, during the hearing, Applicant indicated that he 
and his wife owe the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $32,000. While Applicant provided 
several explanations for the tax debt, he did not provide written documentation which 
provided the full basis for the debt. Part of the basis may have come from capital gains 
from the sale of a family home in 2005.  Part of the basis may have come from income 
taxes Applicant and his wife owed for tax years 2004 and 2007. Applicant testified that 
his wife claimed too many exemptions and they did not have the money to pay the IRS 
when they filed their taxes. Since March 2008, Applicant makes monthly payments of 
$525 towards the tax debt. The IRS also applies Applicant’s tax refunds to the tax debt 
each year. Applicant claims his wife should pay half of the tax debt, but she refuses to 
do so.  They are pending divorce and entered into a property settlement agreement on 
August 9, 2010. Under the terms of the agreement, his wife is responsible for half of the 
federal tax debt. She is also required to reimburse Applicant for half the payments of all 
marital debt that Applicant has paid. She has not done so. Applicant is also filing a 
Request for Innocent Spouse Relief for tax years 2004 and 2007. If he is successful, the 
tax debt will be split in half. (Tr. 18, 20, 58-63; AE A; AE C; AE E) 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a home when they relocated to another state in 
February 2005. Both he and his wife had well paying jobs. The mortgage payment was 
$1,800 a month. The first mortgage was in his wife’s name because she had better 
credit. Both of their names were on the second mortgage. Applicant was laid off in 
 
3 
 
 
February 2007. He was unemployed until June 2007, when he moved to his current 
state of residence to accept the position with his current employer. His wife initially 
stayed behind. She then moved to the area where he currently resides a few months 
later. They lived together for a few months until Applicant moved out of the apartment 
they shared in March 2008. (Tr. 18-21, 31, 34, 50-51) 
 
After Applicant was laid off in February 2007, he and his wife took out a $25,000 
line of credit with a credit card company (SOR ¶ 1.a) to pay off some bills and to 
purchase a $5,000 used car for one of their daughters. Applicant claims that at some 
point he agreed to pay the creditor $400 a month for a year. After a year, the payments 
were then lowered to $250 a month. The divorce property settlement agreement 
requires both Applicant and his wife to pay half of the payment to the company. The 
agreement states that the monthly payment is $212. Applicant did not provide 
documentation verifying his assertions. (Tr. 47-49; AE A at 11) In his post-hearing 
submission, Applicant submitted a copy of a proposed settlement agreement for the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The terms of the agreement required Applicant to make 
several payments which would total $8,900 until the debt is settled on September 30, 
2011. There is no indication that Applicant agreed to this settlement offer. The balance 
on the account as of April 25, 2011, was $25,222. (AE F)    
 
When Applicant moved to his current state of residence, he assumed that his 
wife was going to make the mortgage payments. He claims that she had a good job 
earning over six figures and could afford to make the mortgage payments. She did not 
make the mortgage payments and the home went into foreclosure in November or 
December 2007, after an attempted short sale. They also attempted to apply for a 
hardship program. The application was denied because his wife earned too much 
income to qualify for the program. (Tr. 17-18, 42; Gov 2 at 3-4) The $63,906 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is the second mortgage on the house. Applicant claims the debt is 
written off. He testified that the mortgage company offered a $10,000 settlement, but he 
cannot afford the settlement amount. (Tr. 47-48)  
 
Applicant indicated that he resolved the $2,889 debt alleged in SOR ¶1.b. In 
response to interrogatories dated February 7, 2011, Applicant provided a copy of an 
agreement with the current company collecting on the debt. He agreed to have $1,015 
deducted from his bank account on January 28, 2011 and a $1,013 payment taken out 
on February 28, 2011. He states that on that date, the account was paid off. Department 
conceded that this debt was paid. (Tr. 49-50, 81; Gov 3 at 3, 7) He also paid the $138 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.  This was a utility account for the apartment that Applicant’s 
wife and children continued to live in after he moved out. Appellant testified that this was 
her debt, but he paid it anyway. (Tr. 52-53; Gov 3 at 8)    
 
When they separated, Applicant and his wife had an oral agreement regarding 
child support. As long as he paid the IRS bill, she would not pursue child support. 
Applicant also sent about $350 a month to his children for clothes and necessities. In 
April 2010, his wife filed a formal petition for child support. The court found Applicant 
had a $5,136 child support arrearage. Applicant has been making monthly child support 
 
4 
 
 
payments. Part of the payment each month goes towards the arrearage. The arrearage 
is currently down to $2,800. (Tr. 53-57; Gov 3 at 6; AE B)  
 
Applicant claims that his financial problems were caused when he was laid off 
from his previous job in February 2007 and his pending divorce proceedings. He was 
recently promoted and received an annual pay raise of $7,000. (Tr. 21-22, 38, 67) His 
net monthly income is $2,833.06. Approximately $296.72 is deducted from his paycheck 
each pay period for his child support obligation. (Tr. 67; AE F at 3) His monthly 
expenses include: rent $1,100; groceries $200; utilities $120; car insurance/repairs 
$627; car payment $300; gas $600. His oldest daughter is a college student. He sends 
her $150 each month. He has one open credit card account that has a $500 limit. The 
balance on the account is currently $350. He pays $30 a month towards this account. 
(Tr. 69-72) His total monthly expenses are $3,127. If the figures provided during the 
hearing are accurate, Applicant’s monthly income is not sufficient to meet his monthly 
expenses by $294 each month. These figures do not include Applicant’s monthly 
payments to the IRS and his remaining delinquent debts.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
encountered difficulties meeting his financial obligations. He incurred a $25,000 line of 
credit in June 2007 that was charged off a few months later. He and his wife purchased 
a home in 2005. The home eventually went to foreclosure in late 2007. Applicant’s 
name was on the second mortgage which was over $63,000. He also incurred several 
minor debts that became delinquent.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
 
6 
 
 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant has had recurring financial problems. While not all of his delinquent debts 
were alleged in the SOR, apparently because he paid off several of them during the 
security clearance background investigation, he incurred some significant delinquent 
debts before 2007, including a $32,000 federal tax debt. While he resolved the two 
smaller debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, his two largest debts remain unresolved. 
While he is taking steps towards resolving his delinquent accounts, a concern remains 
based on the unresolved debts. It is too soon to conclude that all of the debts will be 
resolved based on Applicant’s past financial history and his current income.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant was unemployed 
from February to June 2007. However, he testified that his wife’s income was 
substantial. It is unclear whether the family could have met their expenses based on her 
income alone. Applicant and his wife are in the process of divorcing, which is an added 
burden. If his wife continues to earn over six figures, she should be responsible for half 
of the delinquent debt. However, even before Applicant and his wife separated they 
made some irresponsible financial decisions. They are indebted to the IRS for 
approximately $32,000. While the tax debt is not alleged in the SOR, it is reasonable to 
consider this debt when considering Applicant’s overall financial circumstances 
regarding mitigation. When they purchased a house in February 2005, the first 
mortgage on the home was only in his wife’s name because of Applicant’s poor credit 
history. When Applicant was laid off, he and his wife took out a $25,000 loan which they 
were unable to pay back. The loan became delinquent after he started his new job. 
Applicant has not made the most responsible financial decisions in the past.  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. His two largest debts in 
the amounts of over $25,000 and $63,000 remain unresolved. Considering that his 
monthly expenses are more than his monthly income, it is too soon to conclude that his 
delinquent accounts will be resolved in the near future or under control.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant resolved the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. He resolved other delinquent debts before the SOR was issued. 
He is making payments towards the IRS debt. He is meeting his child support 
obligations. Neither the tax debt nor Applicant’s child support payments were alleged in 
the SOR. Applicant is given some credit because he is making payments towards these 
debts. However, Applicant did not provide sufficient proof to show that the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are being resolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant has been 
paying several large debts that were not alleged in the SOR, to include a $32,000 debt 
owed to the IRS and his child support obligations. He resolved his two smaller debts. 
However, his two largest debts remain unresolved. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence indicating that he was making payments towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a. With regard to the $63,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, he indicates that he was 
offered to settle the account for $10,000 but he could not afford to do so. Applicant’s 
monthly expenses are more than his monthly income, which indicates that he is unable 
to resolve his remaining delinquent debts. I considered Applicant’s periods of 
 
8 
 
 
unemployment, his marital separation, and his pending divorce proceedings. While 
Applicant made payments towards two of his delinquent accounts and is making 
payments towards his child support and a debt owed to the IRS, his two largest debts 
totaling over $88,000 remain unresolved. Applicant did not demonstrate a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  He did not mitigate the concerns raised under 
financial considerations.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
