                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-10169 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Judy L. Kibodeaux, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines I 
(psychological conditions) and G (alcohol consumption). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 17, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines I and G for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 28, 2009. DOHA received his 
Answer on February 2, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 
30, 2009. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 1, 2009. On 
July 30, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for August 25, 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
2009. On August 23, 2009, the administrative judge previously assigned to the case 
notified all parties by e-mail that the case was cancelled due to counsel unavailability. 
On July 30, 2009, DOHA issued a notice canceling the hearing scheduled for August 
25, 2009. On September 1, 2009, the case was reassigned to me. On September 15, 
2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for October 27, 2009. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) Items 1 
through 9, which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 4, 2009.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c.(2)., 1.d.(3), 1.d.(4), 
1.d.(6), and 2.a., and denied the remaining allegations. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old electronics technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since May 2006. He seeks a secret security clearance, which is a 
condition of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 45-47, 53.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 1987. He attended college from 
August 1988 to December 1988 and estimates that he earned “nine or twelve” credit 
hours. (Tr. 46.) Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from January 1990 to November 
1990, and was awarded an honorable discharge. He held a security clearance during 
his brief period of naval service. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 He was married from December 1988 to May 1992. That marriage ended by 
divorce. He remarried in November 1994. Two children were born during his first 
marriage -- his daughter is 20 years old and his son is 18 years old. He has a six-year-
old son from his current marriage. Applicant was granted full custody of his two children 
from his first marriage in 1998. Applicant’s oldest daughter is married and living on her 
own and his two youngest children are living at home. Applicant’s wife works full-time 
for a local insurance agency. (Tr. 42-43, 48-50.) 
 
Psychological Conditions/Alcohol Consumption 
 
To obtain a clearance, Applicant completed an e-QIP in July 2006. In doing so, 
he reported, among other things that he had consulted with a mental health professional 
for anxiety and depression. (GE 1.) This self-disclosure prompted an inquiry into 
Applicant’s mental health history, which ultimately lead to an SOR being issued.  
 
1 Applicant’s personal representative had previously marked her exhibits with her own marking system. 
3 
 
                                                          
Applicant has been fighting depression for the better part of his adult life. The 
SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a. that Applicant received mental health counseling from Dr. A 
(specialty unknown) as a teenager (dates unknown) for stress-related medical 
problems. Applicant testified that he saw Dr. A “at about 16 years of age or so” for 
“reoccurring stomach issues.” He saw Dr. A “for a few months” and “did get better.” (Tr. 
63-64.)  
 
The next time Applicant sought professional help for depression occurred in 
approximately 2003 when he consulted with Dr. B (internal medicine).2 Dr. B prescribed 
Paxil, the first in a series of anti-depressant drugs that Applicant’s physicians would try 
as they tried to find the right medication for his condition.3 (AE Item 3A, AE Item 3D.) 
 
Applicant saw Dr. B for approximately two to three years from 2003 to 2006, but 
stopped seeing her because “it was hard to get in to see [her].” Medical records 
completed in November 2005 reflect Dr. B’s diagnosis of Applicant as (1) anxiety, (2) 
panic attacks, and (3) insomnia, secondary to above. (Response to SOR, AE Item 3A, 
Tr. 66-67.) 
 
After seeing Dr. B, Applicant began seeing Dr. C (family practice) for his 
depression in 2006 through the present. Medical records completed in January and 
August 2007 reflect Dr. C’s diagnosis of Applicant as (1) depressive disorder and (2) 
depression with anxiety. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Under the care of Dr. C, Applicant is currently 
taking aspirin, Toprol (blood pressure), Zoloft (antidepressant), and Xanax (anxiety). He 
has been taking these medications for at least the last 12 months and has no intention 
of discontinuing their use. (Response to SOR, GE 2, Tr. 67-68, 125.) 
 
Salient points in chronological order regarding Applicant from Dr. C’s medical 
records reflect: (1) March 2006 “depressed mood for more than 6 months,” (2) April 
2006 “depressed mood [m]uch better on meds,” (3) December 2006 “depressed mood 
better on current rx,” (4) July 2007 “still very depressed and panic d/o. not going to psyc 
any more. On no meds,” (5) August 2007 “Life is stable, mood is much improved, doing 
well, very stable, now. No signs of major depression,” (6) August 2008 “Insight: good 
judgement. Mental Status: active and alert,” (7) December 2008 “Insight: good 
judgement. Mental Status: active and alert,” (8) February 2009 “Insight: good 
judgement. Mental Status: active and alert, normal affect.” (GE 2, AE Item 3.) 
 
As noted supra, Dr. C made reference to Applicant no longer seeing a 
psychologist (Dr. D). Dr. C had referred Applicant to Dr. D. Applicant saw Dr. D for a 
brief time from February 2007 to April 2007. During that time, Dr. D evaluated Applicant 
and in April 2007 medical records reflect his diagnosis as (1) major depression, 
moderate to severe, chronic; (2) probable panic disorder without agoraphobia (anxiety 
2 Dr. B’s involvement with Applicant is not reflected in the SOR. 
 
3 Record evidence reflects that Applicant was prescribed the following medications over the years for 
depression and anxiety: (1) Paxil – prescribed in 2003; (2) Wellbutrin – prescribed in March 2006; (3) 
Lexapro – prescribed in December 2006; (4) Alprazolam (generic for Xanax) – prescribed in April 2006; 
(5) Sertraline (generic for Zoloft) – prescribed in December 2008; and (6) Lamotrigine (generic for 
Lamictal) –prescribed in September 2008. (AE Item 3D.) 
4 
 
about being in places or situations from which escape might be difficult (or 
embarrassing) or in which help may not be available); and (3) alcohol abuse. (SOR ¶ 
1.c.) Applicant denied having “chronic to severe major depression” adding that he had 
experienced a phase of depression and dealt with his problem by seeking professional 
help. He also denied the alcohol abuse allegation. (Response to SOR.) 
 
Salient points in chronological order regarding Applicant from Dr. D’s medical 
record reflect: (1) February 2007 “Insight appears fairly good. Judgement functions are 
fair to hypothetical situations. On a gross clinical basis, intellectual functions appear 
within normal limits,” and (2) February 2007 “He responds well to brief CBT [cognitive 
behavioral therapy];” “I have also reviewed his MMPI [Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory] studies with him. These show a moderate level of depression one with 
anxiety and some [s]omatization [patients who chronically and persistently complain of 
varied physical symptoms that have no identifiable physical origin].” There is no 
evidence of psychosis or more malignant psychopathology [mental distress and 
abnormal, maladaptive behavior].” (GE 3, AE Item 4.) 
 
The Government retained the services of a Dr. E (psychiatrist) to conduct a 
psychiatric evaluation of Applicant for his pending security clearance. Dr. E completed 
his evaluation in September 2009 and provided a provisional diagnosis of Applicant as 
follows: (1) major depression, recurrent, moderate, without psychosis; (2) dysthymic 
disorder history; (3) panic disorder without agoraphobia; (4) generalized anxiety 
disorder; (5) alcohol abuse; and (6) nicotine dependence – full, sustained remission. 
The doctor also noted he had concerns for Applicant’s judgment and reliability. (SOR ¶ 
1.d.) 
 
Applicant adamantly denied the accuracy of this diagnosis stating: 
 
Subparagraph d: (1) “I deny” – I deny having chronic to severe 
major depression. Response: I do admit of going through a phase of it and 
having a “midlife” crisis. I did not know how to handle it on my own so I 
sought the advice of a medical doctor; he put me on medication to help 
control the panic. At the time of this second interview my only issue was 
mood stabilization; this report did show recurrent moderate without 
Psychosis; I do not understand how one can suffer bouts of panic and 
anxiety and then be diagnosed as chronic severe major depression by one 
doctor after a thirty minute session. It appears the second doctor used the 
first doctors records, then after careful consideration changed the 
diagnosis to recurrent moderate, and then used his diagnosis as Alcohol 
Dependent, after I told him I have not consumed any alcohol beverage 
since April 2008. I feel that he made no attempt to gather adequate 
records from my medical doctor and paid no attention to what I told him. 
 
(2) “I deny” this diagnosis of “Dysthymic Disorder” based on 
definition, “a chronic condition by depressive symptoms that occur for 
most of the day, more days than not, for at least 2 years. During this 
5 
 
                                                          
period, any symptom free interval cannot last longer than 2 months.” 
I usually go for 6 to 8 months without attacks. 
 
(3) “I admit” to having a panic disorder. I have panic and anxiety 
attacks. Approximately 2.4 million American adults have panic disorder. 
(National Institutes of Mental Health). 
 
(4) “I admit” to having Generalized Anxiety Disorder. More than 19 
million American adults have an anxiety disorder. (National Institutes of 
Mental Health). 
 
(5) “I deny” being an alcoholic or alcohol abuse. I drank one to two 
times per week, most all on weekends only. In my younger days, ages 25 
– 30 I admit to drinking more heavily. At the time of this diagnosis, I had 
not drunk anything in over 6 months. 
 
(6) “I admit” I smoked for almost 20 years and quit in August of 
2007. Not sure what importance that has on my clearance. (Response to 
SOR. Emphasis added by Applicant.) 
 
Dr. E was called as a witness by the Government.4 Dr. E stated that he prepared 
his evaluation after interviewing Applicant and reviewing the records of Drs. B, C and D 
as well as Applicant’s e-QIP and a list of his medications. (Tr. 71.) 
 
Although Dr. E’s evaluation appears to be thoughtful and well written, there are at 
least two factual discrepancies that are incorrect and appear to have factored into his 
diagnosis. First, his evaluation makes reference to Applicant’s past consumption of 
alcohol as being rather heavy, i.e. “[Applicant] reports drinking a 1/5th of Jim Beam once 
per week prior to this. In the past, he says that he was drinking up to 1/5th of Jim Beam 
every other day.” (GE 5, AE Item 6.) Applicant’s testimony, the testimony of his wife, 
and past medical records dispute this. Applicant and his wife testified that he had not 
had a drink since April 2008. Applicant’s wife emphatically stated, “[Applicant’s] never 
had a fifth of whiskey every other day, ever.” Applicant reported that he told Dr. E that 
he quit drinking during his interview. Additionally, the fact that Applicant had quit 
drinking was reported in Dr. D’s medical records and corroborates the testimony of 
Applicant and his wife. Dr. E apparently adopted or concurred with Dr. D’s diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse, which was somewhat dated at the time Dr. E evaluated Applicant. Dr. E 
added that the discrepancy in Applicant’s alcohol consumption would not make a 
difference in his diagnosis given “the rest of the information in the record.” (Response to 
SOR, GE 3, AE Item 4, Tr. 32-34, 56-58, 94-95.)  
 
Additionally, Dr. E reported in his recommendations that Applicant was not taking 
any medications for his symptoms. This fact is contradicted by Applicant’s testimony 
and by Dr. C’s medical records, which state Applicant is taking medications as 
prescribed by Dr. C. (GE 2, GE 5, AE Item 3, AE Item 6, Tr. 124-125, see also fn 3, 
supra.)  
4 Dr. E’s testimony was offered by way of speaker phone in the hearing room. 
6 
 
At the conclusion of his testimony, Dr. E added: 
 
I usually don’t add things, but what I would like to say is, at the end of this 
interview, my concern was that he (Applicant) get treatment and he 
abstain from alcohol, and that I’m not qualified to determine whether his 
chance of lapsing in judgment will impair a specific or cause problems for 
a specific security risk, but I think that there is treatment and the anxiety 
and depression come under full control, that quite often people can do 
well. And I just wanted to – that was what – my point at the end of this. But 
I was concerned, as we’ve talked about, for those – for the preceding 
reasons. That’s all I needed to say (emphasis added). (Tr. 106.) 
 
On September 10, 2009, Drs. B and C stated in writing that Applicant’s mental 
status does not impair his ability to protect any classified information which may be 
given to him by the Department of Defense. As previously noted, Applicant sought 
treatment from Dr. B from 2004 to 2006 and Dr. C began treating Applicant in 2006 until 
the present. 
 
Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. I found her testimony to be credible. She 
and Applicant have been together 17 years. She stated Applicant quit drinking on April 
4, 2008. Before he quit drinking, she estimated he drank a half a pint to a pint of 
whiskey on the weekends. She is familiar with his drinking habits because she prepared 
his drinks. Applicant’s drink of choice was a mixed drink of whiskey and Dr. Pepper. She 
added that she never experienced family problems as a result of Applicant’s drinking. 
Applicant has never had an alcohol-related driving offense. She never felt in danger as 
a result of his psychological conditions. She stated Applicant sought ministerial help 
from their local church to cope with depression and anxiety. He also has a network of 
family and friends to rely on for additional help. Applicant’s wife emphasized that Dr. E’s 
report of Applicant consuming a fifth of whiskey every other day is completely 
erroneous. She further stated Applicant is involved with their children. He has had to 
have his medications adjusted over the years and is currently under the care of Dr. C. 
(Tr. 18-44.) 
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. I found his testimony to be credible. The 
last drink Applicant had was in April 2008. He described his former drinking habits as 
drinking a pint of whisky (mixed drinks) on the weekends. Applicant also described the 
various medications he was prescribed over the years to control his depression as well 
as his reactions to those medications. Applicant did not particularly find his experience 
with Dr. D favorable, but does enjoy a good rapport with Dr. C, his current physician, 
and follows his advice. He described the ministerial counsel he received from his local 
church which included listening to a CD program “Attacking Anxiety and Depression.” 
He is taking the medications prescribed by Dr. C and has no intention of discontinuing 
their use. Applicant addressed and disputed the discrepancies in his medical records 
regarding his past use or purported alcohol abuse, as well as Dr. E inaccurately 
reporting that he was not taking medications. (Tr. 45-68, 108-134.) 
 
 
7 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted six reference letters, which are summarized: 
 
1. Current supervisor and system analyst – He has known Applicant since 2006. He 
described Applicant’s work ethic and dedication as “above reproach.” Contract changes 
resulted in cutting company positions from twelve to eight and “only the best remained 
to maintain the highest efficiency rating.” He concluded by saying that Applicant is an 
asset to the company and he would like to keep him as a member of his team. 
(Response to SOR, AE Item 7.) 
 
2. Co-worker and electronics technician – He has known Applicant since 2006. He 
described Applicant as an employee who has “many times contributed greatly to the 
high caliber of mission readiness.” Applicant is more than capable of handling any task 
that is assigned to him in an efficient and professional manner. He concluded by saying 
that Applicant is a well liked and well respected individual with an “undying dedication to 
the men and women of our armed services . . . of whom we train.” (Response to SOR.) 
 
3. Friend and co-worker – He has been a friend of Applicant for 16 years and a co-
worker since 2005. He described Applicant as a trusted and reliable person that he and 
his family can depend on in time of need. Applicant no longer drinks or smokes, is very 
hard working, dependable, and reliable. Applicant is a family man and is involved with 
his children. Applicant is “very level headed” and “never let his medical problems . . . 
interfere with his work.” He concluded by saying that Applicant’s “dedication to his 
family, God, work and friends is inspirational” and that he was honored to know him and 
call him a friend. (AE Item 7.) 
 
4. Previous employer (owner and supervisor) – He was Applicant’s previous employer 
from 2001 to 2005. Applicant was employed as the manager of his business, which 
consists of providing coffee machines, and coffee, party supplies, and janitorial supplies 
to local businesses. He stated Applicant supervised two employees and had direct 
contact with his customers. Applicant was responsible for daily deposits, keeping the 
books, paying the bills, and performing payroll functions. Applicant always presented 
himself in a professional manner. Applicant is very dependable and a model employee. 
He concluded by saying “[Applicant’s] knowledge, trustworthiness, dedication, 
dependability, work ethics, and professionalism was evident in his everyday activities 
and makes him the kind of employee you would be honored to have, and I would hire 
again.” (AE Item 7.) 
 
5. Previous co-worker and friend – He worked with Applicant when Applicant was 
employed at his previous employer from 2001 to 2005. He stated Applicant went out of 
his way to see that each customer was fully satisfied with company products and 
services. Applicant was professional, treated people fairly, and gave his best effort to 
the businesses he served. Applicant was dedicated to his family, job, and customers 
and did not let his anxiety or panic attacks affect his ability to do his job. Applicant is 
“the kind of person one is proud to associate with and work with” and “I would gladly 
work with [Applicant] again.” (AE Item 7.) 
8 
 
6. Friend and co-member of Masons – He is a 25-year friend of Applicant. He has 
associated with Applicant frequently during that time span and stated that Applicant has 
never been an alcoholic. Applicant has not had a drink since April 2008. Applicant 
“works very hard at controlling the depression that comes with the panic attacks, and is 
determined that this will not control his life. His faith in God has been his sustaining 
strength, and he is under the care of a good physician. He is taking medication 
prescribed by his doctor.” Applicant is very involved with his family in all respects 
whether it is attending a sporting event or taking his children to the doctor. Applicant is 
the Master of their local Mason’s Lodge and presides over approximately 65 men. He is 
so well regarded at the Lodge that he was asked to serve an additional term as Master. 
He concluded, “the world is a better place in which to live because of [Applicant’s] 
dedication to God, family, work, and friends. I am proud to say that [Applicant] is my 
friend and co-mason.” (AE Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a certified copy of his police record that reflects he does not 
have any adverse information on his driving record or have a criminal record. (AE Item 
7.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
9 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude two relevant security concerns under Guidelines I and G are 
applicable.  
 
Psychological Conditions 
 
AG ¶ 27 articulates the security concern relating to psychological conditions: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
AG ¶ 28 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; 
 
10 
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and  
 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
 
The Government produced sufficient evidence warranting application of AG ¶¶ 
28(a), (b), and (c). Applicant was diagnosed by Dr. E (Government psychiatrist) with 
major depression, recurrent, moderate, without psychosis; dysthymic disorder history; 
panic disorder without agoraphobia; and generalized anxiety disorder. Dr. E also noted 
that Applicant was not taking any medications for his symptoms. These factors raise 
concerns under this Guideline and warrant further inquiry. 
 
Five psychological conditions mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 29 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
I find that AG ¶¶ 29(a) and 29(b) fully apply to Appellant’s case. His condition is 
readily controllable with treatment. He has been under the care of Dr. C since 2006 and 
is taking his prescribed medications. Before that, he was under the care of Dr. B from 
2004 to 2006. Although Dr. E’s (Government psychiatrist) report is not particularly 
favorable, he did state in his testimony that patients with depression can do quite well 
with treatment. Dr. C (Applicant’s current physician) clearly supports the notion that 
Applicant is doing well. Applicant has also sought and received ministerial support from 
his church as well as family support. His wife’s testimony and his references provide 
11 
 
persuasive evidence covering 25 years of his personal and professional life. All of these 
individuals report that Applicant’s condition is under control and is properly monitored 
and managed. Drs. B and C are most familiar with Applicant, unlike Dr. D, who saw him 
for about three months in 2007 and Dr. E who saw him for a relatively brief one-time 
evaluation. I find the opinions rendered by Dr. B and C more persuasive given their 
extensive history with Applicant. Since at least 2003, Applicant has voluntarily sought 
professional help and followed his attending physician’s (Dr. C’s) treatment plan, which 
includes taking his medications. According to Drs. B and C, Applicant’s condition is 
amenable to treatment. Dr. C’s most recent medical notes state that Applicant’s insight 
reflects good judgment and his mental status is active and alert with normal affect. In 
sum, his prognosis is good.  
 
Applicant’s superb employment record, family life and community involvement 
paint a picture of stability. Applicant has learned how to cope with his depression as 
noted by the evidence he presented. Dr. C noted Applicant’s good judgment and that 
Applicant was not suffering from major depression. In September 2009, Drs. B and C, 
doctors most familiar with Applicant, stated that his mental status does not impair his 
ability to protect classified information. Based on my evaluation of the record evidence 
as a whole, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under psychological 
conditions.  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern relating to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 provides two potentially disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence. 
 
The primary focus of this case centers on Applicant’s psychological conditions. 
Alcohol consumption concerns collaterally arose apparently after a psychologist 
reviewed Applicant’s medical records. Alcohol consumption concerns were identified as 
a result of information contained in Drs. D and E’s evaluations. Dr. D, who Applicant 
saw for three months, and Dr. E, who Applicant saw for a one-time evaluation, both 
diagnosed Applicant as an alcohol abuser based on heavy alcohol consumption. These 
diagnoses sufficiently raised disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 22(c) and (d). 
12 
 
Four alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 29 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Assuming arguendo that the diagnosis of alcohol abuse is based on accurate 
information, AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (b) fully apply. Applicant’s descriptions of his alcohol 
consumption have been consistent. He acknowledged his alcohol consumption in the 
past. Applicant has not had a drink since April 2008 and has established a sufficient 
period of abstinence. He leads a life of total sobriety. As noted, Applicant adamantly 
disputes the accuracy of his purported past alcohol consumption, particularly as 
reported by Dr. E, and has successfully rebutted those inaccuracies. Applicant’s work 
behavior has not been indicative of his having an alcohol problem. He is considered a 
valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. In any event, 
Applicant is under the care of Dr. C, who is monitoring his overall condition. AG ¶¶ (c) 
and (d) are not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
13 
 
                                                          
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I have carefully weighed all evidence and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and a well-
grounded member of his community and a dedicated family man. He honorably served 
in the Navy, albeit for a short period of time. He has worked for his employer since May 
2006. He has the full support of company management as well as the support of his 
former employer. Except for the pending allegations, there is no evidence of 
questionable behavior by Applicant.  
 
Applicant has been willing to do whatever is necessary to manage his depression 
and he ended his alcohol consumption in April 2008, two years ago. His struggle has 
not always been easy, yet he continues to persevere. Drs. D and E’s evaluations of 
Applicant are not favorable; however, when comparing the basis of their diagnoses with 
that of Drs. B and C, who have treated Applicant for years, I am inclined to give greater 
weight to the latter. I also gave considerable weight to Applicant’s testimony, the 
testimony of his spouse, and his reference letters. These letters covered the range of 
professional, personal, and community involvement. When balancing the evidence pro 
and con, I find the scale weighs in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Additionally, Applicant has significant family and church support, stable 
employment and a strong work ethic. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and 
commitment to his condition. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe 
Applicant recognizes the importance of maintaining his treatment plan and managing 
his depression. In sum, I find Applicant has sufficiently mitigated security concerns 
raised.  
 
Overall, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his psychological conditions and alcohol consumption 
security concerns.  
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”5 and 
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
14 
 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.c.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
