1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-06058
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                               
________________________
Decision on Remand
________________________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
By decision dated September 21, 2009, the Appeal Board remanded this case to
me to issue a new decision consistent with their opinion. Based on a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and remand order, I conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 25,
2004. On December 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F
and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application); Tr. 23, 70, 73-74.1
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 16, 2008. He
answered the SOR in writing on January 10, 2009, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 12, 2009. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 12, 2009, and I received the case
assignment on February 17, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 23,
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 24, 2009. The government
offered five exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He did not submit any exhibits. I,
however, held the record open for 30 days for Applicant to submit additional evidence.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 31, 2009. On April 24, 2009,
Applicant timely submitted nine exhibits, AE A through AE I, without objection. These
exhibits have been marked and admitted into the record. The record closed on April 24,
2009.
DOHA issued my decision on May 29, 2009. Department Counsel appealed,
alleging error in my findings regarding SOR allegations 1.c and 1.i and under AG ¶¶ 20
(b), (d), and (e). The Appeal Board remanded this case for further findings.
In compliance with the decision of the Appeal Board, I issued an order on
November 10, 2009, reopening the record. The order instructed Applicant to obtain
certain information. Applicant received the order on January 14, 2010, because his
address had changed and his mail was not timely forwarded. Applicant immediately
contacted DOHA. After a telephone conference with Applicant and Department
Counsel, Applicant’s request for an extension of time to comply with the order was
granted. On January 19, 2010, an order was issued holding the record open until March
11, 2010 for Applicant to comply with the original order and giving the Government 30
days to respond. The Government submitted its response on April 15, 2010, which was
received on April 16, 2010. Applicant submitted three additional exhibits, AE J through
AE L, which are admitted into evidence. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant, who is 52 years old, works for a Department of State contractor as a
Senior Production Control Technician in the Data Processing Center. He has worked in
his Department of State contractor job since 1989, with the exception of one year
between 1994 and 1995 and two months in late 1997 and early 1998. He holds a top
secret clearance. 1
Applicant graduated from high school, then attended a technical school for data
processing training. He recently attended a bartender school and is certified as a
bartender. He worked a second full-time job from 2000 until 2004, when his employer
laid him off. As a result of the lay off, his income decreased from $108,000 a year to
Tr. 75, 79-80, 84-85.2
GE 1, supra note 2; Tr. 25, 70-72, 85-86, 89.3
AE A; Tr. 96-98, 117.4
AE E (Leave and earnings statement showing garnishment); AE F (Leave and earnings statements showing5
garnishment), total at 21; Tr. 29-31, 67-68.
GE 2 (Applicant’s response to Interrogatories, including credit report, dated August 12, 2008); GE 3 (Credit6
report, dated October 16, 2008); GE 4 (Credit report, dated May 25, 2006); GE 5 (Credit report, dated
November 4, 2004).
3
approximately $60,000 a year. He has not worked a second job since 2004, but he is
now seeking part-time employment as a bartender.2
Applicant married in 1989. He and his wife separated in 2001, but have not
divorced. For several years after his separation, Applicant continued to pay the car
insurance and car payment on his wife’s car. He stopped making these payments when
he lost his second job in 2004. He has a 25 year-old son, who lives independently and is
a diabetic. He regularly provides his son with money to pay for insulin, as his son is
often short on cash.3
Applicant’s father died in 1994. For several years prior to his father’s death,
Applicant regularly traveled between his home and his father’s home, about 150 miles
away, to help care for his father. He also helped his father pay for medications and has
helped other family members with expenses. He used his credit cards to pay for these
expenses. By 1998, his debt overwhelmed him. He enrolled in a credit management
program. From October 1998 through August 2005, he paid approximately $550 a
month to this company, which then paid his creditors. Through this program, he
resolved many of his outstanding debts.4
In 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a tax lien against him
personally. IRS collected the moneys due through a bi-monthly garnishment on his
wages. From May 2003 until approximately November 2004, Applicant paid the IRS
$1,166 twice a month for a total payment of more than $44,000.5
The SOR lists numerous debts, which are listed at least once on each credit
report and sometimes more than once because the debt is under other creditor’s
names. After reviewing the credit reports dated November 4, 2004, May 25, 2006,
August 12, 2008, October 16, 2008,  and the SOR, I have compiled a list of the total
debts owed, excluding any duplicate entries. I find that Appellant’s actual debts are as
follows:6
Applicant believed this account had been paid in his payment plan developed in 1998, but the account7
number is different.  See AE A. The credit reports show conflicting information on the status of this debt (all
the same account number), including paid, a zero balance and transferred or sold.  See GE 2, supra note 7,
at 11; GE 3, supra note 7, at 3; GE 4, supra note 7; GE 5, supra note 7.
Appellant skipped his car payment one month and the creditor repossessed his car. He immediately made8
the payment and regained possession of his car. Tr. 86.
4
SOR ¶ CREDITOR AMOUNT    STATUS EVIDENCE
1.a Judgment $  4,810 Unpaid GE 2 - GE 5; Tr.
27-29, 83
1.b Federal tax lien $24,701 Paid $44,000 by
November 2004
AE E; AE F; Tr.
29-31, 68, 91
1.c Collection agency
(unknown creditor) 
$  1,377 Denies, unpaid GE 2; GE 3; Tr.
31-39
1.d Telephone $     401 Paid AE G
1.e Credit card $  4,660 Disputed; Paid GE 3 at 4; GE 4 at7
12
1.f Store account $  5,699 Settlement offer
accepted, Paid
5/1/09
AE H
1. g Jewelry store $     541 Paid AE B
1.h Store account $  3,463 Paid; same as 1.f Tr. 48-50
1.i Retail creditor
unknown
$  1,525 Denies, unpaid Tr. 54, 99
1.j Cell phone $     866 Denies, unpaid Tr. 57-60
1.k Credit card $  1,941 Paid GE 3 at 3; Tr. 60-
61
1.l Jewelry store $     340 Paid, same as 1.g AE B
1.m Store account $  1,017 Paid GE 3 at 3; Tr. 62-
63
1.n Cable bill $     750 Denies, unpaid Tr. 63-67, 106-109
In 2004, after he lost his second job, Appellant fell behind in paying his apartment
rent and other expenses because of the IRS garnishment.  At this time, he paid not only8
his car payment and insurance, but also the car payment and insurance for his wife for
a total of $1,300 a month (which he no longer pays). He acknowledges that his former
Tr. 26-29, 84-88.9
See generally ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).10
Tr. 63-67, 106-109. At the conclusion of the hearing, I requested Applicant obtain a statement from this11
creditor showing he did not owe any debt. Tr. 156. Instead, Applicant provided AE I, which disputes the debt.
Tr. 57-60, 103-105.12
GE 2, supra note 7, at 4, 35-37; AE D; Tr. 118-136.13
5
landlord obtained a judgment for unpaid rent in 2005 and that he has not paid this debt.
He contacted this creditor sometime ago, but has not resolved the debt as the creditor
demanded full payment and refused to accept a monthly payment.9
Two debts listed in the SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i are unknown to Applicant as he does
not recognize the listed creditor. Applicant’s credible denial of knowledge of these two
debts is sufficient to refute the allegations of delinquent debts. The pertinent credit
report did not have sufficient information for Applicant to locate the account.  10
Appellant denied owing a debt to the cable company listed in SOR allegation 1.n.
In the past, he received cable service from another cable company and two satellite
companies. Although he acknowledged at the hearing that he returned a cable box for
his girlfriend who had service with this cable company, he strongly denies any service in
his name. Subsequent to the hearing, he filed an identity theft claim on this debt.   11
Applicant also credibly denied owing the unpaid cell phone listed in allegation 1.j.
He previously had a cell phone with three other cell phone companies, but not this
company. Several years ago, he asked this creditor to provide him with evidence that he
owed them money. At that point, the creditor sent him a bill.12
Applicant currently earns $5,915 in gross income each month and $4,214 a
month in net income. His monthly expenses total approximately $4,000 and include
rent, utilities, a car payment, gasoline, credit cards, food, and a time share. He uses his
remaining income to help his son with medicine and occasionally other family
members.  13
I make the following additional findings of fact. With the exception of the
judgment in SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant denied owing all the debts listed in the SOR.
At the hearing, each debt was discussed. Through this discussion, the status of some
debts was determined. Applicant again denied any knowledge of the creditor in SOR
allegation 1.c. (Creditor C). Creditor C first appeared on the credit report dated August
12, 2008 and again on the October 16, 2008 credit report. Creditor C is a credit
collection company, not the original creditor. The original creditor is unknown. The
August 12, 2008 credit report indicated that Applicant became delinquent on this
account in March 2008. This credit report also had an extensive list of creditors with the
relevant contact addresses and telephone numbers, but it did not have any information
GE 2; AE K; Tr. 31-40. 14
GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; AE A; AE J; AE K..15
6
regarding Creditor C. The Government agreed that neither credit report provided an
address or telephone number for Creditor C, leaving Applicant without any means to
obtain information from Creditor C about this debt and to pay the debt, if his. (Tr. 37-39).
Applicant challenged this debt with one of the credit reporting companies, following the
remand decision of the Appeal Board. Creditor C is not listed on Applicant’s latest credit
report, dated February 13, 2010, which is from a company which previously listed the
Creditor C debt. Since the debt became delinquent in March 2008, the credit reporting
company did not remove Creditor C because the information was stale. Under these
facts, I find that the debt owed Creditor C has been removed as a result of his
challenge.14
Applicant disputed the debt in SOR allegation 1.e (Creditor E-$4,660) sometime
prior to the issuance of the SOR, as shown on the August 12, 2008 credit report.
Applicant continued to dispute this debt. He filed a second dispute with the credit
reporting agency and a dispute directly with Creditor E, the collection agency. The
information provided to Applicant by Creditor E, after receiving his dispute, indicated
that the debt is a personal loan Applicant obtained from Bank A in March 2001. The
November 4, 2004 credit report shows a personal loan with Bank B that was being
managed by a financial counseling service, and a credit card with Bank A that was
either closed or past due or with no balance. The May 25, 2006 credit report reflects
that the personal loan debt with Bank B was closed/paid and had a zero balance, and
that the credit card debt with Bank A had been sold to Bank B. Creditor E, the current
creditor, purchased one debt in April 2006 from Bank B. The August 12, 2008 credit
report showed that one of the Bank B accounts (not specified) was paid, transferred, or
derogatory. Based on information from the credit reports, I find that the Creditor E debt
is the credit card debt that originated at Bank A, then transferred to Bank B, and later
sold to Creditor E, which now holds the debt. 
Applicant provided a history of his debt repayment program from October 1998
through February 2005. This record showed two separate accounts with Bank B and
three different account numbers for Bank B. The personal loan account number is listed
for this program. The remaining two account numbers do not match the account
numbers listed on the May 25, 2006 and August 12, 2008 credit reports for Bank B.
However, the credit reports going back to November 2004 do not show more than two
accounts with Bank B and Bank A. After reviewing all the information of record, I find
that the credit card account that originated at Bank A, then transferred to Bank B, and
later sold to Creditor E, which now holds the debt was included in the debt repayment
program.15
At the hearing, Applicant did not deny he had accounts with the creditors listed in
SOR allegations 1.d, 1g, and 1.l. He denied owing these creditors any money, as he
believed the debts had been paid. After the hearing, he paid the debts. His change in
Applicant testified to having several satellite accounts.16
Response to SOR; AE B; AE G; Tr. 49-50, 64-67.17
AE K.18
GE 5; AE A; AE E; AE F.19
GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; AE K.20
7
position is not explained. Concerning the debts in SOR allegations 1.f and 1.h, which
are the same debt, Applicant testified that a settlement offer had been made.
Subsequent to the hearing, the creditor accepted his offer and he paid the debt.
Applicant consistently denied owing the debt in SOR allegation 1.n, stating that his
cable account had been paid.  Following the hearing and after further discussion with16
Department Counsel and investigation, Applicant decided to file an identity theft report
on this debt. This debt is now disputed. He did not file a similar report on any other
debt.  17
Applicant denied the debt in SOR allegation 1.i because he did not recognize the
creditor. This debt is currently owned by a credit collection agency, which listed as the
original creditor, a creditor unknown to Applicant. Applicant has not resolved or disputed
this debt.18
The debts in SOR allegations 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n
are listed on the November 2004 credit report. Applicant paid 1.b by late 2004 through
garnishment. He also paid 1.e, 1.k, and 1.m under his payment plan.19
Applicant’s credit reports reflect many “paid as agreed” accounts over many
years and many paid collection accounts. Since November 2004, his credit reports
show an improvement in his financial situation. His 2008 and 2010 credit reports
indicate that he pays his bills in a timely manner, and that he has few old unpaid
debts.20
 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
8
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
9
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay some
obligations for a period of time. In compliance with the Appeal Board’s decision, I find
that the Government established its case on all allegations in the SOR. The evidence is
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), mitigation may occur when
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose
in the mid-1990s and continue. His financial problems did not occur long ago or under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. This mitigating condition does not
apply.. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s financial
problems began in the mid-1990s when he father became ill. Applicant provided his
father with money to buy medications and regularly traveled several hundred miles to
help care for his father for a number of years. By 1998, Applicant realized that he could
not pay his bills and sought help with a financial counseling company. For seven years,
he paid this company monthly and it resolved a number of his bills, including the debts
in SOR allegations 1.e, 1.k, and 1.m. Applicant also began working a second job in
2000. In 2001, Applicant and his wife separated. He assumed certain financial
responsibilities from their marriage until 2004, when his second job ended. Between
2000 and 2004, Applicant paid his financial obligations by working two jobs. He had
sufficient income to pay two obligations from his marriage. When he lost his second job,
he decided he could not afford to pay his estranged wife’s bills and stopped. Applicant
acted reasonably in 1998 by working with a credit counseling company and through
2005 by working a second job to pay his living expenses, garnishment, and debt
payment plan. This mitigating condition applies SOR allegations 1.b, 1.e, 1.k, and 1.m. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not received credit counseling
recently, but did receive credit counseling when he worked with the credit counseling
company. He resolved three SOR debts through his counseling plan. Through the
garnishment of his wages, his federal tax lien was paid by 2004. Applicant’s current
Although Applicant has disputed this debt with Creditor E, I found that the debt was paid through his earlier21
debt repayment plan.
10
finances are under control and his current bills are paid. This mitigating condition
applies to SOR allegations 1.b, 1.e, 1.k, and 1.m.21
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant
contacted the creditor and paid the debts he owed in SOR allegations 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h,
and 1.l. At the hearing, Applicant indicated that a settlement offer had been made to the
creditor in SOR allegations 1.f and 1.h, which are the same debt. After the hearing, the
creditor accepted his offer and Applicant quickly settled and paid the debt. Negotiations
are a back-and-forth process until the parties reach an agreement. The process takes
time to reach a conclusion and Applicant successfully resolved this debt by working
through the process. As for the bill with the jeweler (SOR allegations 1.g and 1.l),
Applicant initially believed that he did not owe any money on this debt as he had
received refund payments from the creditor in the past. Following the hearing, he
investigated the debt and learned that he did owe additional money to the creditor. He
paid his debt upon learning this information. Even though Applicant paid both debts
after the hearing, he had developed a working relationship with the one creditor prior to
the hearing and paid the second after developing additional information that showed he
owed these debts. His actions indicate a good-faith effort on his part to resolve these
debts.
An Applicant can mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 20(e) when “the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant disputed the debt in
SOR allegation 1.e after receiving the interrogatories and prior to October 16, 2008, two
months before the issuance of the SOR. He continued to dispute this debt with the
credit reporting companies and the collection agency, which now holds the debt. His
dispute of this debt is legitimate, because he paid all his debts with the original creditor
through his earlier payment plan. Applicant continually denied owing a cable bill. His
decision to file a fraud report, following the hearing arose after further investigation and
discussions with Department Counsel about this debt, is reasonable in light of his
continued denial of this bill. These discussions provided him further insight on how to
address the issue of this bill. Applicant also disputed the debt in allegation 1.c after the
hearing. He continually denied any knowledge of this creditor. The credit reports failed
to identify the original creditor, and did not list an address or telephone number for this
creditor. Thus, Applicant had no way to contact the creditor or pay the debt if it was his.
Given that the Appeal Board considered this debt proven, Applicant properly disputed
after remand under these facts. This mitigating condition applies to SOR allegations 1.c,
1.e, and 1.n only.
11
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or deny a
security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both favorable and
unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the evidence of record,
not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is established and then
whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a
reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
Applicant paid the following SOR debts: 1.b ($24,701), 1.d (401), 1.e ($4,660), 1.f
($5,699), 1.g ($541), 1.h ($3,463), 1.k ($1,941), 1.l ($340), and 1.m ($1,017). His credit
reports listed many paid non-SOR debts, including at least five personal loans, several
store accounts, four or more credit card accounts, and car leases. In assessing whether
an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F, the Appeal Board provided
the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 200). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
12
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. His financial
problems are the result, in part, of poor choices made about spending money. While
providing care and money for medicine for his ailing father, Applicant incurred significant
debt, which he tried to pay. For four years after his father died, he unsuccessfully
attempted to pay his debts. In 1998, he sought and received financial counseling
through a debt consolidation company. Through this company, he developed a payment
plan to address his large debts. For the next seven years, he routinely paid the
counseling service, which then paid his creditors until the bills were paid. His decision to
seek help with his finances and his compliance with the program shows that he not only
acted in a responsible manner, but that he is willing to accept responsibility for his
debts. He completed his payment plan, resolving his largest debts, several of which are
listed in the SOR. During this period of time, he repaid his federal tax lien and more
through a substantial wage garnishment, which impacted his available net income. To
further help with managing his finances and family obligations, he obtained a second
full-time job. Through these efforts, he resolved much of his debt.  After losing his
second job in 2004, Applicant encountered some financial difficulties, but not to the level
he incurred in the 1990s. Over the last five years, he has worked slowly to resolve his
new financial issues. His one major unpaid debt, the judgment, is not resolved or being
resolved because the creditor is uncooperative, not for lack of effort on Applicant’s part.
Because of his long history of debt resolution, his statement that he tried to resolve the
judgment debt is credible.
 
Applicant has taken affirmative action to pay or resolve most of the delinquent
debts raising security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) He has not paid the cable bill, a cell
phone bill, and a collection debt listed in the SOR because these debts are not his or
unknown to him. These debts represent about 15 % of the debts listed in the SOR.
Even though he has had financial problems, he has demonstrated a meaningful track
record of debt repayment. He is not required to be debt free to hold a security
clearance. Rather, he must manage his finances and live within his financial means.
The newer credit reports show that Applicant pays his current bills, has resolved many
of his old debts, has paid many his of debts in a timely manner, and has done so
through his financial difficulties.
13
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.n: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
