  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01930 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O'Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2004 for failure to stop and give information following 
an automobile accident. The charge was dismissed. In 2006, Applicant was arrested for 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), which resulted in a 2009 conviction. Applicant has 
rebutted or mitigated the Government’s security concerns under criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 27, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
criminal conduct and alcohol consumption. 
  
 On September 21, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On October 15, 2009, I was assigned the case. On November 5, 2009, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on November 18, 2009. At 
the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through I, 
which were admitted into evidence. On December 1, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the factual allegations in the SOR, 
with explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old, has worked for a defense contractor since September 
2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. On September 1, 2007, Applicant 
retired from the United States Air Force with 25 years honorable service. (Tr. 32) 
Coworkers and friends indicate Applicant demonstrates good work ethics, has sound 
judgment, is reliable, and trustworthy. (Ex. A—E)  
 
From 1981 through 2008, Applicant, at times, consumed alcohol to excess. In 
2004, Applicant was arrested for failure to stop and give information. Applicant was 
involved in a vehicle accident where his vehicle struck another car, which spun the other 
car around before it struck the guard rail. (Ex. 3) Applicant was in a pool league and had 
been drinking prior the accident. (Tr. 51) His attention was directed at his car’s 
radio/tape deck when he noticed he was quickly approaching the car in front of him. He 
was unsuccessful in his attempt to swerve to keep from striking the other car. (Tr. 35) 
His vehicle also spun around striking the guard rail and doing damage to his door and 
the rear door. (Tr. 35) He indicated he was scared and disoriented and kept driving 
following the accident. (Tr. 36) Ten minutes later, he was arrested eight to ten miles 
away as he continued to drive home. (Ex. 3, 5, Tr. 36) Applicant was administered and 
passed a field sobriety test. (Tr. 36)  
 
In August 2004, Applicant divorced from his wife of ten years. While going 
through the divorce, Applicant admitted he would drink more often. (Ex. 3, Tr. 35) He 
went to bars with friends three to four times a week and on weekends. (Ex. 3)  
 
In April 2006, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI). 
Applicant fell asleep while driving home and hit a parked car. (Tr. 38) Prior to the 
accident he was playing pool and had three or four beers in a four hour period. He then 
went to another bar, had two more beers and three shots of tequila during an hour and 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
2 
a half period. (Ex. 3) At the time of the accident, Applicant’s blood alcohol content (BAC) 
was .12, which exceeded the legal limit (Ex. 5, Tr. 39, 72)  
 
Applicant received a letter of reprimand from his commander and his base driving 
privileges were revoked for one year. (Ex. 2, Tr. 66) With the loss of driving privileges, 
Applicant did much walking and soul-searching. (Tr. 40) The walking gave him plenty of 
time to think about things. (Tr. 41) In April 2006, Applicant underwent a comprehensive 
psychiatric evaluation for alcohol abuse and was deemed not to have a substance 
abuse disorder. (Ex. 2) In May 2006, Applicant completed the one-day Alcohol Drug 
Abuse Prevention and Treatment (ADAPT) training at his air base. (Ex. 2, Tr. 65) 
Applicant decided to abstain from drinking. He completed the state approved defensive 
driving course. He attended school and completed his Bachelor of Science (B.S.) 
degree in social psychology. (Ex. 2)  
 
In August 2006, Applicant was interviewed about his drinking. (Ex. 3) He stated 
he had stopped drinking on April 18, 2006, because he felt he might have had a 
problem with drinking, but did not believe he was an alcoholic. (Ex. 3, Tr. 57) Applicant 
saw his 2006 arrest as a “wake-up” call. (Tr. 59) From April 2006 through early 2008, 
Applicant abstained from drinking alcohol. In early 2008, Applicant resumed drinking 
limiting his alcohol consumption on occasion. (Tr. 68, 74) In July 2009, following the 
receipt of the SOR, he decided to quit drinking for health reasons. (Ex. 2, Tr. 42) He 
does not intend to drink in the future. (Tr. 64)  
 
In September 2008, Applicant made a signed, sworn statement in which he 
stated: 
 
Since the arrest in 2006, I consume no more than four beers a week. I 
have been intoxicated, but do not know how many times. I do not have a 
problem with alcohol and intend on drinking responsibly in the future. I no 
longer consume to the level of intoxication . . . (Tr. 5, page 3 of 4) 
 
On November 16, 2009, two days before his security clearance hearing, the 
failure to stop charge was dismissed and Applicant was sentenced for his DWI 
conviction. (Ex. F, G) There was no explanation as to why the matter did not go to court 
sooner. Applicant was sentenced to a $300 fine, $399 in court costs, $90 supervisor fee 
for probation, and 180 days in the county jail (suspended). (Ex. G, Tr. 28) Applicant paid 
the court $781. (Ex. I) Applicant was required to perform 24 hours of community service, 
ordered to complete a certified DWI Education Program (AIDE), to complete an Alcohol 
Treatment Evaluation (ATPE), and complete DWI Victim Impact Panel (DIP). Starting 
November 16, 2009, he was sentenced to six months probation. As of the hearing, 
Applicant had yet to meet with his probation officer, start his community service, or 
complete AIDE, ATPE, or DIP. (Tr. 46)  
 
Since his arrest, Applicant has become more involved with his parents, siblings, 
his fiancé, and five children ranging in age from two to twenty-six. (Tr. 49) He often acts 
as the designated driver when he goes out with others.  
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to 
criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Potentially disqualifying conditions are: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2004 for failure to stop and give information following 
an automobile accident. The charge was dismissed. In 2006, he was charged with DWI. 
In November 2009, he was sentenced on his DWI conviction to pay $781 for a fine, 
court costs, and supervisory fee. His 180 days jail sentence was suspended. He was 
sentenced to six month probation. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Those that are 
potentially mitigating are: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement; and, 
 
 Although only recently sentenced—two days before the hearing—the most recent 
offence occurred more than two and a half years earlier. AG ¶ 32(a) applies. Although 
Applicant was divorced in August 2004 and was going out drinking more often while the 
 
5 
divorce was proceeding, this is not the type of pressure contemplated in AG ¶ 32(b). AG 
¶ 32(b) does not apply. There is evidence of successful rehabilitation including his work 
performance and his completing his B.S. degree. There has been no additional criminal 
activity in more than two and a half years and he is well respected at work. AG ¶ 32(d) 
applies. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
Applicant was arrested and convicted of DWI. AG ¶ 22(a) Aalcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other criminal incidents of concern, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,@ 
applies. 
 
Prior to his 2004 arrest for failure to stop and give information following an 
automobile accident, Applicant had been playing pool and drinking beer. Following his 
arrest, he successfully passed a field sobriety test. No alcohol related charges arose out 
of the accident. It was Applicant’s inattention and not his alcohol consumption that 
caused this accident.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns. Those that potentially apply are: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s sole alcohol-related arrest occurred more than two and a half years 
ago. Applicant has admitted to being intoxicated on other occasions, but there is no 
evidence these periods of intoxication led to any involvement with the law or other 
 
6 
adverse action when these periods of intoxication occurred. The record fails to indicate 
when these periods occurred. Following his most recent arrest, Applicant did not drink 
from April 2006 until early 2008. From early 2008 to July 2009, he limited his drinking. In 
July 2009, following his receipt of the SOR, he again chose to abstain from drinking. 
Even though abstinence is required only for those diagnosed as alcohol dependent, 
Applicant has established a pattern of abstinence. He received ADAPT counseling while 
in the Air Force. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(d) apply. AG ¶ 23(d) does not fully apply because 
Applicant has not received a favorable prognosis as required in the AG ¶ 22(d). 
Applicant realized his drinking did not improve his life.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is motivated to refrain from 
all use of alcohol and is committed to maintaining abstinence. The evidence of 
successful rehabilitation including obtaining his B.S. degree was also considered. 
 
Applicant has had a single alcohol related arrest—the 2006 DWI. He has been 
involved in no additional adverse action in more than two and a half years. He currently 
abstains from alcohol use. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct and alcohol consumption 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
7 
 
8 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Alcohol Consumption:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
