                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09013 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant lacks a track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
September 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
Applicant’s undated response to the SOR allegations was received by DOHA on 
October 7, 2009. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on December 16, 2009. DOHA issued the notice of hearing on January 
22, 2010, convening a hearing on February 4, 2010. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
admitted without objections. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 
through 7, which were admitted without objection. AE 7 was received post-hearing. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 16, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted 23 of the 24 SOR allegations. He denied the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old network systems administrator employed by a defense 
contractor. He finished high school in 1986, and is currently attending college. He 
expects to receive his bachelor’s degree in computer science in April 2010. Applicant 
married his wife in February 1990, and they have two children. 
 
Between 1990 and 1997, his wife was employed full-time and she contributed to 
the household financial situation. In 1997, his wife was unemployed for a period 
because of complications with the delivery of one of their children. In 1997, Applicant 
filed for bankruptcy protection and all of his unsecured financial obligations were 
discharged. (Tr. 80-82) 
 
Applicant filed his first security clearance application in May 2009. In it, he 
disclosed having numerous delinquent debts. His background investigation addressed 
his financial problems. The SOR alleges 24 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$65,000. He attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, and his separation from his wife from 2004 until 2007. Because of 
his reduced income and the separation from his wife, he was not making sufficient 
money to pay for his day-to-day financial obligations and his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows he was fully employed with diverse 
employers from January 1993 until 2006. He was unemployed from September 2006 
until March 2007. He had a temporary job from March 2007 until December 2007. In 
December 2007, he was hired full-time by his current employer, a government 
contractor. Additionally, Applicant has held a part-time job as a fitness instructor from 
July 2000 to present.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant separated from his wife in June 2004. He did not pay child support 
because he was not allowed access to his children. In 2005, his wife secured court-
ordered child support for $1,500 a month, including arrearages. During his 2006 periods 
of unemployment, Applicant sought relief from the $1,500 court-ordered child support, 
but the court denied relief. Because of the court-ordered child support and his periods of 
unemployment, he was not able to pay his truck note and returned it to the dealership. 
He had purchased the truck new in 2002. He also was evicted from his apartment in 
2006. He moved in with his mother to save money and to be able to pay his child 
support obligation.  
 
Applicant and his wife reconciled in February 2007. His wife worked from 
January to September 2008, and they were able to do better with their financial 
problems for some time. However, she has been unemployed since. Applicant’s 
personal financial statement shows he was making approximately $3,800 a month, 
including $600 he makes on his part-time job. His monthly living expenses add up to 
$3,000. They have approximately $535 in monthly disposable income.  
 
As of his hearing date, Applicant had made payment arrangements to satisfy the 
following debts:  
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a. The total debt owed is $37,362. The creditor filed suit against him, 
they settled the debt in 2009, and he made sporadic payments in October 2009 ($250), 
December 2009 ($500), and February 2010 ($250) (AE 7).  
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant owes approximately $15,000 to the IRS for overdue 
income taxes. He established an installment agreement in 2007, and has been paying 
approximately $125 a month since through a wage garnishment (AE 7). 
 
3. He owes $2,000 on back taxes to a state and claimed he settled the debt and 
was paying $100 monthly. AE 1 shows he has a payment agreement with the state and 
that he issued a bad check to cover this debt. He has not been able to make consistent 
payments, but intends to pay the debt as soon as his financial situation stabilizes. 
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.l alleged a $605 debt to a collection agency. AE 2 shows he has a 
payment agreement with the creditor to pay $50 monthly. The evidence does not show 
when he established the payment agreement, whether he has been making consistent 
monthly payments, or if he is current with his payment agreement.  
  
5. AE 3 shows Applicant has a payment agreement with the creditor in SOR ¶ 
1.n. The evidence does not show when he established the payment agreement, 
whether he has been making consistent monthly payments, or if he is current with his 
payment agreement. 
 
6. Applicant also claimed he settled and was paying on the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.k and 1.v. SOR ¶ 1.k alleged a $4,157 debt to another state for overdue income 
taxes. He claimed he made a payment agreement to pay $193 a month for 24 months. 
 
4 
 
 
He has not been able to make consistent payments, but intends to pay the debt as soon 
as his financial situation stabilizes. He presented no documentary evidence to support 
his claims. 
 
Applicant testified he has not contacted, made payment arrangements, or made 
any other attempts to resolve any of the remaining alleged SOR debts because he does 
not have the financial means to resolve the debts. Based on Applicant’s credit reports, 
his testimony, and his statements, I find that Applicant is responsible for all the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. His liabilities total approximately $65,000. These 
debts are not resolved. 
 
Applicant testified he and his wife have a budget and they try to follow it. His plan 
is to pay some of the large debts first and then address the other smaller debts. He 
underwent financial counseling approximately 10 years ago when he filed for 
bankruptcy protection. He has not received financial counseling recently. He is against 
contracting for the services of a debt management company because he does not have 
the money to pay for their services. He believes he can handle his financial situation on 
his own. He presented no evidence of any prior financial counseling, participation in 
consumer debt consolidation programs, or that he was following a budget. It appears he 
has made payment arrangements only after legal action was initiated against him. 
 
Applicant was forthcoming about his past and present financial situation. He 
highlighted his good performance for his employer and that he is considered a valued 
employee. There is no evidence that Applicant has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems and averred he has 
always intended to pay his delinquent debts. He promised to make satisfactory payment 
arrangements with all of his creditors sometime in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant’s debts were discharged through bankruptcy in 1997.2 The SOR 
alleged 24 delinquent debts. Applicant and his spouse are responsible for all of the 
alleged delinquent debs, many of which have been delinquent for many years. Their 
total liability is approximately $65,000 in unresolved SOR debt. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations, apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence to show that he has settled and 
made some payments on six of the alleged debts. However, it appears he has made 
payment arrangements only after legal action was initiated against him. He also 
established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to 
 
2 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to disclose these debts under Guideline F or E. As such, 
this information cannot be used to deny Applicant’s security clearance. Notwithstanding, I may consider 
any behavior not alleged in the SOR to: assess his credibility; evaluate his evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; assess his possible rehabilitation; determine the applicability of the 
AGs; and conduct the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
 
7 
 
 
pay his debts, i.e., his and his wife’s periods of unemployment and underemployment, 
and their four-year separation. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully 
mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The evidence shows Applicant and his wife do not have a track record of 
financial responsibility. He presented little evidence of debt payments, contacts with 
creditors, or negotiations to resolve his SOR debts. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, his financial problems are not under control. Applicant receives credit for 
contacting some of his creditors and establishing payment plans. However, his evidence 
does not show he has been paying consistently on his payment plans except when his 
pay is garnished. It is too soon to determine whether he has a viable plan to resolve his 
financial predicament or that he will be able to avoid similar financial problems in the 
future. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), (e), and (f) do not apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are not yet under control, and he did not participate in recent financial 
counseling. He also failed to show he made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts, 
because it appears he has made payment arrangements only after legal action was 
initiated against him. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility 
by taking sufficient timely actions to resolve his debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature man and a good 
worker. He has continued his education with a view to improve his financial situation. He 
has worked well for his employer. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. These factors show some 
responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. Applicant also established some 
circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to pay his debts. His 
current financial problems primarily seem be the result of his separation from his wife. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He and his wife have been together since 2007 
and he has been fully employed since December 2007. Applicant should have been 
more diligent and made greater efforts sooner to resolve his delinquent debts. His 
documented steps are simply inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations 
concerns. 
 
 Applicant has made payment arrangements when he has been legally forced to 
do so. His favorable information fails to show financial responsibility and good judgment. 
He has made little effort to resolve his financial obligations. He presented little 
documentary evidence of debt payments or contacts with creditors to resolve his debts. 
His financial problems are not under control. It is too soon to determine whether he can 
establish a viable financial plan to resolve his current problems and whether he has 
learned to avoid similar financial problems in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.x:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
