  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08850 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In November 2005, Applicant sold illegal drugs and four months later illegally 
sold two pounds of marijuana. He was sentenced to five years imprisonment. In July 
2007, he left prison, having served 16 months. He remains on probation until 2011. His 
last use of marijuana was a month before the hearing. Applicant has failed to rebut or 
mitigate the Government’s security concerns under drug involvement, personal conduct, 
and criminal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 30, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
illegal drugs, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. 
  
 On August 19, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
December 22, 2009, I was assigned the case. On January 4, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on January 25, 2010.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was held open 
to allow additional information from Applicant. On February 26, 2010, additional material 
was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was 
admitted into the record as Ex. A. On February 2, 2010, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the allegations in the SOR. He 
admitted the factual allegations, in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b., but that his actions were 
unintentional. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old mail clerk who has worked for a defense contractor 
since October 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Co-workers who 
know him state Applicant is kind hearted, trustworthy, diligent, loyal to his family and 
friends, has a strong work ethic, and is a team leader who displays integrity, 
responsibility, and ambition in his job. (Ex. A) During the summer, Applicant had a 
second job doing landscaping. (Tr. 30)  In 2003, Applicant graduated from high school. 
(Tr. 36) He has taken some college classes. (Tr. 36)  
 
 In November and December 2005, Applicant used marijuana four times. On 
November 22, 2005, Applicant, then age 19, sold $20 worth of crack cocaine to an 
undercover police officer. (Ex. 3, page 5 of 27) When arrested, Applicant had in his 
pocket the money the undercover officer had paid him and less than one gram of 
cocaine. Applicant was with another individual who Applicant stated he did not know 
until Applicant “started dealing.” (Tr. 54) Applicant was arrested and charged with drug-
manufacture/deliver controlled substance. In January 2006, he received deferred 
adjudication, was fined $200, and was placed on two years probation. Applicant had to 
attend a six-week drug abuse class. He also had to wear an ankle bracelet. In 
November 2005, Applicant tested positive in a drug test. (Ex. 2) In March 2006, his 
deferred adjudication was revoked and he was sentenced to six months in jail.  
 
 In March 2006, the police arranged to buy two pounds of marijuana from 
Applicant for $650. (Ex. 3, page 14 of 27) On March 7, 2006, Applicant sold the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
2 
marijuana to an undercover police officer. Following a vehicle chase, Applicant was 
arrested. In the car was 17 grams of crack cocaine, 229 grams of marijuana, and 38 
ecstasy tablets. (Ex. 3, page 15 of 27) At Applicant’s residence, the police found, 55 
grams of marijuana in the refrigerator, 4 grams in the sofa, and 7 grams in a basket. 
Also discovered were $1,000 in cash in a shoe box, $500 in a liquor box, and $800 in 
other locations in Applicant’s apartment. (Ex. 3, page 16 of 27) 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with the sale and delivery of marijuana. He 
was also charge with intent to deliver a controlled substance. He was convicted of both 
felonies after pleading guilty and was sentenced to five years confinement. In July 2007, 
Applicant left prison having served 16 months. (Ex. 4, Tr. 42) While incarcerated, he 
attended 18 drug-treatment counselings. (Ex. 2) He was placed on parole until 2011.  
 
 Applicant’s explanation of the March 2006 arrest follows. An individual unknown 
to him asked him if he knew anyone who sold marijuana. The individual, an undercover 
police officer, stated he was looking to buy three pounds of marijuana. Applicant needed 
money for his upcoming trial expenses related to his November 2005 arrest. (Tr. 55) 
Applicant exchanged telephone numbers with the individual and went to an 
acquaintance Applicant knew sold marijuana. The acquaintance put marijuana in a 
backpack and both drove to meet the individual wanting to buy the marijuana. Applicant 
states he was unaware the backpack contained anything but marijuana. The bag also 
had cocaine in it.  
 
 On April 17, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In section 23, he was asked about his police record. 
He was specifically asked if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense 
related to alcohol or drugs. He answered “yes,” and listed his March 2006 arrest, 
conviction, and incarceration, but failed to list his November 2005 arrest. (Ex. 1) He had 
been told his sentences would run concurrently and the two actions were being treated 
as one case so he simply listed the most recent conviction. (Tr. 47)  
 
 In section 24, he was asked about his illegal drug use and activity. He was 
specifically asked if, during the previous seven years, he had ever been involved in the 
illegal purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, or 
sale of any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen, or cannabis for his own 
intended profit or that of another. Applicant asserts he misunderstood the question. (Tr. 
48) He answered “no” to the question, but indicated he had used marijuana four times in 
2005. (Ex. 1)  
 
 In November 2009, Applicant again used marijuana. (Tr. 46, 68) As a condition of 
parole, Applicant is subject to periodic drug tests. In December 2009, about a month 
before the hearing, Applicant tested positive for illegal drugs. He used marijuana to see 
if he wanted to continue using drugs. He has decided not to continue using illegal drugs. 
Applicant asserts he made mistakes because he was young and has changed his 
lifestyle. He also asserts the criminal conduct occurred during a six to eight-month 
period in his life, which has not recurred. (Ex. 27) Applicant no longer associates with 
 
3 
those individual he saw before his incarceration. He now stays with a friend in a quiet 
area of town. (Tr. 35) He is currently attending church. (Tr. 52) He plans to attend 
college classes in the fall of 2010. (Tr. 43) He hopes to open his own business. (Tr. 44)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Revised adjudicative guideline (AG) ¶ 24 articulates the security concerns 
relating to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable are: 
(a) any drug abuse; 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 In 2005, Applicant used marijuana and started dealing in illegal drugs. In 
November 2005, he was arrested for selling cocaine to an undercover police officer. In 
March 2006, he was arrested for selling two pounds of marijuana to a police officer. At 
the time of the arrest, the police discovered 17 grams of crack cocaine, 229 grams of 
marijuana, and 38 ecstasy tablets. At Applicant’s residence, the police found, additional 
marijuana located in the refrigerator, the sofa, and various other places in Applicant’s 
apartment plus $2,300 in cash. Applicant was sentenced to five years imprisonment, 
served 16 months, and left prison in July 2007. In December 2009, in a periodic drug 
test required as a condition of his parole, Applicant tested positive for marijuana. AG ¶¶ 
25 (a), 25(b), and 25 (c) apply.  
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
5 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
None of the mitigating factors apply. AG ¶ 26(a) Applicant’s use of marijuana was 
recent, having occurred one month before the hearing. His marijuana use did not occur 
under unusual circumstances and his use casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Applicant no longer sees the individuals with whom he was 
arrested and now lives in a different area. However, in viewing these factors the period 
of abstinence can not be ignored.  
Applicant’s last marijuana use was one month before his hearing. There are no 
“bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be 
based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by 
the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the 
Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an 
applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing 
was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 One month is not a significant period of abstinence.  
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because prescription drugs were not abused. Even 
though Applicant has received counseling related to drug usage, AG ¶ 26(d) does not 
apply because he has used marijuana since his treatment. Finally, there is no favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
Personal Conduct  
 
 Revised adjudicative guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns 
relating to personal conduct: 
 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
6 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 In April 2008, Applicant completed his e-QIP. He did not list his November 2005-
drug arrest because it and his March 2006 drug arrest were handled as a single matter. 
He listed the more recent of the arrests. I find for him as to SOR ¶ 2.a. However, this 
only explanation for failing to lists his arrest in response to section 24 of the e-QIP was 
he misunderstood the question. I find against Applicant as to SOR ¶ 2.b. None of the 
following mitigating factors apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
7 
 Applicant did not make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the omission (AG ¶ 
17(a)) nor did he receive bad advice from a reliable source (AG ¶ 17(b)). AG ¶ 17(c) –
17 (g) do not apply on their face.  
Criminal Conduct 
Under the Criminal Conduct Guideline, the security eligibility of an applicant is 
placed into question when an applicant is shown to have a history or pattern of criminal 
activity which creates doubt about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those conditions that are potentially applicable are: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. Unless 
the person receives a waiver, a person who has been convicted in a 
Federal or State court, including courts martial, sentenced to 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and incarcerated for not less 
than one year, may not be granted or have renewed access to classified 
information. 
Applicant was convicted of felony drug offenses and sentenced to five years 
incarcerations. He served 16 months. He is on probation until 2011. AG ¶¶ 31 (a), 31(c), 
31(d) and 31(f) apply.  
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; 
 
8 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement; and, 
(e) potentially disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) above, may not be 
mitigated unless, where meritorious circumstances exist, the Secretaries 
of the Military Departments or designee; or the Directors of Washington 
Headquarters Services (WHS), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 
National Security Agency (NSA), Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) or designee, has granted a waiver. 
 Applicant most recent arrest was approximately three years ago. He left prison in 
July 2007. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply because the conduct did not occur under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Insufficient time has passed since his 
last use of marijuana.  
 AG ¶ 32(b) does not apply because Applicant was not pressured or coerced into 
committing the act. Applicant was out of work and turned to drug dealing to make 
money. Many unemployed people do not become drug dealers. AG ¶ 32(b) does not 
apply because Applicant committed the offenses.  
 There is some evidence of rehabilitation. He no longer associates with those with 
whom he was arrested. He has a steady, full-time job and works a second, part-time 
job. His work performance appears to be outstanding. He is attending church. All these 
factors are evidence of rehabilitation. But AG ¶ 32(d) also considers the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity. However, Applicant’s most recent illegal use of 
marijuana was one month prior to his hearing. 
 Further, Applicant was sentenced to five years imprisonment and served 16 
months. When an applicant has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for a 
term exceeding one year and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than 
a year the disqualifying condition can not be mitigated unless Applicant is granted a 
waiver. The evidence is insufficient to warrant a waiver. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. During a six to eight month period in 
2005 and 2006, Applicant was a drug dealer. In November 2005, Applicant sold illegal 
drugs and four months later sold two pounds of marijuana. The amount of money seized 
at the time of the March 2006 arrest suggests that the selling of drugs was a lucrative 
activity for Applicant. In July 2007, he left prison and in October 2007, obtained his 
current job. He is making changes for the better in his life. However, his last use of 
marijuana was a month before the hearing. It is too soon to say illegal drugs are no 
longer a part of his life. He remains on probation until 2011. He was not completely 
honest when the completed his April 2008 e-QIP.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement, personal conduct, and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Illegal Drug Usage: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c: Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant  
  
 Paragraph 3, Criminal Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 
  
 
10 
 
11 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
