 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06495 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Scott Boyer, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 17, 2007. On 
August 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline G. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 2, 2009; answered it on September 
23, 2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
was ready to proceed on January 10, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on 
January 19, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 27, 2010, scheduling 
the hearing for February 17, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on February 25, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR and 
offered explanations. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since June 
2000. She worked for a defense contractor after graduating from college in 1986, and 
then began working in private industry in 1994. (Tr. 66-67.) She is married and has two 
children, ages 17 and 13. She received a security clearance in June 2000. 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol in high school, when she was 15 years old. 
She consumed one or two beers at parties about once a month. In college, she 
increased her consumption to two or three beers twice a month, but every two or three 
months she would drink three or four beers and become intoxicated. After college she 
continued to drink beer but started drinking wine and mixed drinks, and she became 
intoxicated every two or three months. (GX 4 at 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant reduced her drinking between 1992 and 1996 after her children were 
born. She continued to drink wine, but not to the point of intoxication. Between early 
1997 and 2005, she stopped drinking beer but continued to drink wine and mixed 
drinks, and she drank to intoxication about every other month. (GX 4 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant found the combination of the demands of being a spouse, a mother, 
and a professional engineer difficult and stressful. In 2005, she began using alcohol to 
relax at the end of the day, and her consumption increased to about two bottles of wine 
a week. (GX 4 at 4; Tr. 73.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband became concerned about her excessive drinking and 
encouraged her to seek help. She consulted with her physician, who did not treat her for 
alcohol abuse, but prescribed anti-anxiety medications and recommended that she seek 
treatment from an alcohol addiction counselor and a psychiatrist. (GX 4 at 5.) She 
followed her physician’s advice. Her psychiatrist diagnosed her as alcohol dependent. 
(AX A.) She completed a three-day inpatient detoxification program from January 25 
through January 28, 2006, followed by an intensive outpatient program in February and 
March 2006. She began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings regularly after 
completing the outpatient program. (Tr. 77-78.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant resumed her alcohol use in the summer of 2006. She underwent a one-
week inpatient detoxification and treatment from October 20-26, 2006, and she was 
diagnosed by a medical doctor as suffering from depression and alcohol dependency. 
Recommended aftercare included intensive outpatient treatment and AA participation. 
(GX 7 at 5-6). She participated in an intensive outpatient program from October 30, 
2006 to November 27, 2006. Upon discharge, she was diagnosed as suffering from 
major depression and alcohol dependence, and she was given a referral to a 
psychiatrist and a therapist. (GX 9 at 2.) 
 
In December 2006, her husband notified the police that she was intoxicated 
when she drove away from their home to attend an AA meeting. She was arrested for 
driving while intoxicated (DUI) and reckless driving. After she pleaded guilty, her driver’s 
license was suspended for seven months, she was fined, and she was required to 
attend an intoxicated driver’s training program. She voluntarily entered an intensive 
outpatient program in December 2006, completed it in January 2007, and was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The discharge summary contains no prognosis. (GX 
10 at 3.) 
 
After relapsing, Applicant entered a one-week detoxification program in February 
2007, followed by a 30-day residential treatment program that she completed in late 
March 2007. (GX 5 at 4; Tr. 84-85.) She relapsed again almost immediately, and was 
admitted to a detoxification program on March 27, 2007, which she completed on April 
2, 2007. (GX 8 at 29-34.) She was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and in post-
intoxication withdrawal, with major depression, generalized anxiety disorder, and 
substance-induced sleep disorder. (GX 8 at 29-37.) She received additional treatment in 
April and May 2007. (GX 5 at 4; AX B; Tr. 87-88.) She relapsed again, entered an 
intensive outpatient treatment program in May 2007, and completed it in July 2007. (AX 
C; Tr. 89-90.)  
 
Following another relapse, Applicant completed a one-week inpatient treatment 
program in October 2007. (GX 5 at 4; Tr. 80-81.) She abstained from alcohol until she 
“had a small slip” in April 2008, when she purchased a bottle of wine, brought it home, 
and consumed a glass of it. (Tr. 90, 134.) She testified she had a “mild physical 
reaction” to the Antabuse she had been taking when she consumed the wine. (Tr. 135.) 
She has abstained from alcohol since her relapse in April 2008. 
 
Applicant currently takes an antidepressant, a drug to suppress alcohol craving, 
Antabuse, and a sleep aid. (Tr. 99-100.) She continues to attend AA meetings about 
once a week. (Tr. 102-03.) She does not have a regular AA sponsor. She testified that 
she finds it very difficult to share her thoughts and feelings with others, making it difficult 
to form a bond with a sponsor. (Tr. 105-06.) 
 
Applicant continues to see her psychiatrist at about three-week intervals. (Tr. 
114.) In a letter written to DOHA in September 2009, her psychiatrist states that her 
problems with anxiety “are currently in remission” and she is “quite stable in her 
recovery from alcohol dependence and stable psychiatrically as well.” (AX A at 2.) In a 
 
4 
 
 
letter prepared for the hearing, her psychiatrist describes Applicant as “quite stable in 
her recovery from alcoholism,” a “vastly different person,” and fully fit for duty. He states 
that her condition “has been completely and successfully treated and no further 
impairment exists.” (AX A at 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband stopped consuming alcohol in 2000 because he thought it 
was important for them to have a “sober household.” (Tr. 92.) They have begun sharing 
family responsibilities. They have stopped attending social events centered on alcohol. 
They now have a smaller group of friends who are mostly non-drinkers. (Tr. 148.)  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations for two rating periods from October 2001 
through September 2003 reflect a “fully successful” rating, in the middle of a five-point 
scale. She was rated as “excellent,” the second highest rating, for October 2003 through 
September 2004. She was rated as “outstanding,” the top rating, for October 2004 
through September 2005. In December 2005, she was promoted to a more responsible 
position. Her rating for October 2005 through September 2006 was “excellent.” Her 
rating for October 2006 through September 2007 dropped to “fully successful.” (AX D 
and E.) She received performance awards in March 2002, November 2003, and 
September 2004. (AX F, G, H, and I.)  
 
 Applicant’s manager since December 2005 testified that she is a “successful 
contributor.” After she returned from sick leave in 2007, she was productive and 
valuable. (Tr. 35-36.)  
 
Applicant’s team leader since December 2007 testified he made her his deputy 
because he has confidence in her ability to fully manage the team as well as fulfill her 
individual engineering assignments. He would rate her performance as “excellent.” Even 
though she works less than full time (30 hours per week), she gives “110 percent.” On 
several occasions, she has worked on her day off to make sure that commitments are 
met. She is honest, responsible, and capable of performing under pressure. (Tr. 51-54, 
60-61.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
 
5 
 
 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from about 1980 to at least April 2008. SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.k, 1.m, and 
1.n allege multiple periods of treatment for alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence 
between December 2006 and July 2007. SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a DUI arrest in December 
2006 and a subsequent conviction.  
 
6 
 
 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline G is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.” Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, 
treatment for alcohol dependence, and multiple relapses raise the following disqualifying 
condition under this guideline: AG 22(a) (“alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence”); AG ¶ 22(c) (“habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”); AG ¶ 22(d) (“diagnosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) 
of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence”); and AG ¶ 22(f) (“relapse after diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program”). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a), (c), (d), and (f), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant has 
maintained sobriety since October 2007, with one relapse in April 2008. Thus, the focus 
is on the first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) (“so much time has passed”). 
 
There are no Abright line@ rules for determining how much time must pass to 
establish AG ¶ 23(a). The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows that “a significant period of time has 
passed” without any evidence that the excessive alcohol consumption has recurred, 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
After a long struggle and many relapses, Applicant finally gained control of her 
alcohol dependence in October 2007. Her single relapse was more than two years ago. 
She has surrounded herself with a strong support structure, including her spouse, AA, 
and her psychiatrist. Although she has found it difficult to form a close bond with an AA 
sponsor, she has a long-standing, open, and beneficial relationship with her psychiatrist. 
Her husband stopped drinking in order to be more supportive of her continued sobriety. 
She and her husband have reduced the domestic stress level by adjusting their division 
of family responsibilities. They have adjusted their lifestyle to avoid alcohol-centered 
activities. Applicant has continued to perform well as an engineer. She is determined to 
maintain sobriety. I conclude AG ¶ 23(a) is established. 
 
7 
 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). This mitigating 
condition is established, because Applicant has acknowledged her alcohol problem, 
taken extensive and repeated actions to overcome it, has relapsed only once since 
October 2007, and has been continuously abstinent since April 2008, more than two 
years ago. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual is a 
current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no 
history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress.” AG ¶ 
23(c). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has a history of 
previous treatment and relapse. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if --   
 
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
AG ¶ 23(d). This mitigating condition is established. Applicant has completed several 
inpatient and outpatient programs, attends AA meetings regularly, and has received a 
strong and favorable prognosis from her psychiatrist.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, soft-spoken, introverted, intelligent woman. She is a 
perfectionist. She tried to balance her roles a spouse, mother, and professional 
engineer and was overwhelmed. From December 2006 to October 2007, she repeatedly 
sought professional help, relapsed several times, and persisted in her rehabilitative 
efforts until she finally made a breakthrough. She has adjusted her lifestyle to make it 
less stressful and found new friends. She has continued to participate in AA and seek 
the counsel of her psychiatrist on a regular basis. She is controlling her anxiety and 
depression with prescribed medications. She was calm, thoughtful, and candid as she 
testified about her struggle with alcohol dependence. In spite of her repeated treatment 
and relapses she has retained the respect of her colleagues and supervisors.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, I conclude it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
