 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-09482 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2006, Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions. On April 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 29, 2009. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 14, 2009, and DOHA received his answer on May 18, 2009. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 27, 2009. The case was 
 
2 
 
 
previously assigned to two other administrative judges before it was assigned to me. 
The first assignment occurred on July 28, 2009, the second reassignment occurred on 
September 18, 2009, and the third assignment to me occurred on September 28, 2009. 
On October 20, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for 
November 17, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through X, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his behalf. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 24, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations alleged. After 
a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old parachute rigger, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2000. (GE 1, Tr. 15-16.) Applicant seeks to reinstate 
his security clearance. Maintaining a clearance is a condition of his continued 
employment. (Tr. 16-17.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1980. (Tr. 23.) He served in the 
U.S. Army from October 1989 to August 1998, and was honorably discharged as a 
private first class (pay grade E-3). His military occupational specialty was 43E 
(parachute rigger). He was awarded an associate’s degree in general science and 
business in June 2007. (GE 1, Tr. 17-18, 24.)  
 
Applicant married in April 1993. He has two adult daughters from a previous 
relationship as well as an adult stepdaughter. Applicant and his wife have a 13-year-old 
daughter. (Tr. 18-23, 25.) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant has a history of episodic alcohol abuse, marked by an extensive history 
of six alcohol-related arrests spanning a 16-year period from March 1989 to August 
2005. This hearing was Applicant’s second DOHA hearing in which alcohol formed the 
basis of security concerns.  
 
His previous hearing was held on July 21, 2004, and five alcohol-related 
concerns were substantiated. They are: (1) he was arrested in March 1989 for driving 
under the influence. He was convicted and fined; (2) he was charged in September 
1993 with driving while impaired, with a blood alcohol level of .07%. He was in the Army 
serving overseas at the time. His commander issued him a letter of reprimand; (3) he 
was apprehended in December 1996 for driving under the influence. He was serving in 
the Army stateside at the time. His commander awarded him 45 days extra duty at 
nonjudicial punishment; (4) he was apprehended in May 1998 for driving under the 
 
3 
 
 
influence. He was serving in the Army stateside at the time. His commander awarded 
him a reduction in grade at nonjudicial punishment. This reduction in grade was a 
career-ending event for him; and (5) he was arrested in January 2000 for driving while 
intoxicated. He was convicted and his driver’s license was suspended. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b.i. – 
v.) (GE 1 – 10, Tr. 25-41.) 
 
He stated at his July 2004 hearing that he had quit drinking since January 2004, 
and that he intended to abstain from alcohol. (GE 5, pgs. 35-36.) The following colloquy 
occurred between Applicant and his counsel at his July 2004 DOHA hearing: 
 
Q. And do you understand how controlling your alcohol 
consumption, and controlling the impulses that make you want to 
consume alcohol, is important for you to be eligible to maintain, or receive 
a security clearance? 
 
A. Most definitely. Like, I don’t think I’m going to have a major 
problem controlling, because I’ve stopped for six months. And I have 
stopped before, for four, and I don’t have a problem stopping. But I always 
go back. 
 
Well this time, I’m thinking, me and my wife have talked. And I think 
what’s going to help me the most is, I’m seeking God in my life right now. 
I’m going to church every Sunday. And I’m just trying to learn more about 
the Bible, to turn my life over to Him. 
 
And I think the only reason I haven’t right now is I don’t know as 
much about religion. And that I know I’m going to have to give up drinking. 
So when I’m ready to do that, I want to be sure that I know exactly what 
I’m doing. And I don’t feel like it will be a problem. 
 
Q. And you’re ready to give up drinking, correct? 
 
A. Yes, sir. (GE 5, pgs. 47-48.) 
 
Following his hearing, the Administrative Judge granted Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant testified at his second hearing, “I believe after we had the hearing, 
me and my wife, we flew back home and probably that weekend I had a beer or two, not 
getting drunk but a beer. And then over time, I was drinking two and three beers again.” 
(Tr. 41.) 
 
Since Applicant’s previous 2004 DOHA hearing, he was arrested again for 
driving under the influence in August 2005. He was convicted and sentenced to jail, 
fined, and referred for alcohol screening and counseling. Applicant testified that he “was 
held overnight and saw the judge the next morning. He (the judge) released me on my 
own and I went back to court and the jail sentence was suspended. I had to pay I think 
$1,100 in fines and I went through a[n] alcohol program.” (Tr. 42.)(SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
 
4 
 
 
The evidence also established that Applicant consumed alcohol from 1984 to 
2009, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication. He admitted to experiencing 
blackouts from drinking. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) (Response to SOR, GE 1-10, Tr. 48-49, 59.) 
 
Applicant testified that he presently consumes alcohol and that the last time he 
consumed alcohol was the weekend before his second DOHA hearing. He admitted 
being intoxicated that weekend. He later clarified his answer stating that he was not 
“intoxicated,” but “buzzed.” (Tr. 45-48.) When asked by Department Counsel if he 
intended to continue drinking alcohol in the future, he responded, “If – I need to stop, I 
would. If it was appointed by this proceeding or if I had to, yes, ma’am. I would stop. But 
had I thought about stopping? Yes. On my own, but I don’t think unless I’m told to by 
this proceeding that I would stop.” (Tr. 46.) 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant engaged in the following colloquy: 
 
Q. How are you going to avoid getting a DUI in the future? 
 
A. By not getting in the wheel (sic) when I have been drinking. 
 
Q. Now, didn’t you essentially give that same answer in 2004? 
 
A. Yes, and I believed – on myself, I believed I had control of that in 
2004. But the way I was thinking about it is when I go somewhere, my wife 
is driving. Well, I can’t depend on her. I have to depend on myself. And 
that’s why I say if I’m anywhere and I’ve been drinking, I’m not driving. I’ve 
picked up golf now. I don’t drink when I’m playing golf. Other guys do. I 
take them home and pick them up when they call me and ask. That’s how 
I’m changing. (Tr. 52.) 
 
When I queried Applicant about how he viewed alcohol today, he responded, “I 
think I’ve made bad decisions with drinking. I don’t think I drink too much or I’m an 
alcoholic. I think I’ve made very poor decisions by drinking and driving.” (Tr. 58.) 
Applicant is not in a treatment program adding that he thought about going to Alcoholic 
Anonymous meetings, stating “[b]ut I fight with myself on that because I don’t believe I 
have a problem.” (Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Applicant submitted ten work-related reference letters. All of the authors of the 
reference letters were positive in their assessment of Applicant and view him as 
trustworthy and reliable. AE B – J. He also submitted 14 work-related certificates 
reflecting his contributions as a defense contractor employee. AE K – X.  
 
Policies 
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern concerning alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
 Two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. Guidelines ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) provide: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant’s six alcohol-related arrests from 1989 to 2005, admitted periodic 
excessive drinking from 1984 to 2009, and admitted blackouts warrant application of AG 
¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). The Government produced substantial evidence supporting these 
two disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never 
shifts to the Government.1 
 
 Two alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and there is no 
“bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on my evaluation of 
1See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
the record evidence as a whole2 and Applicant’s having been granted a clearance 
following a DOHA hearing in July 2004 and his return to drinking despite assurances he 
would not do so, I am unable to apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant appeared to have acknowledged his drinking problem at his July 2004 
hearing and stated that he had quit drinking in January 2004. He returned to drinking 
the first weekend after his July 2004 and continues to drink to the present. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. Applicant’s return to drinking lead to his August 2005 arrest for driving 
under the influence 13 months after his July 2004 DOHA hearing. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient corroborating evidence suggesting he has 
overcome his problem. His assurances that he does not have a drinking problems ring 
hollow given his record of six alcohol-related arrests with the most recent arrest 
occurring after his last DOHA hearing. I am left with doubts regarding his continuing to 
drink and whether his alcohol consumption problems are “unlikely to recur.”  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant was honorably discharged from the Army after serving over eight 
years. He has been a valued employee for the past ten years working for a defense 
contractor. Other than his past alcohol-related arrests, he is a law abiding citizen. He 
submitted statements of positive work-related references. 
 
However, Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol abuse and the related problems 
that alcohol consumption has caused him and others leaves me with doubt regarding 
2See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). 
   
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
his eligibility to hold a security clearance. Particularly troubling is his prior history of 
having gone through this hearing process in 2004 and his return to drinking which 
resulted in a subsequent alcohol-related arrest. Given his history, more is required than 
his assurances that he does not have a drinking problem.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption. The evidence leaves me with 
doubts about Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.   
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the 
law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole-person factors”3 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not 
eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. to c.:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
