 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
      
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04850 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and a “whole-person” analysis. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed a questionnaire for sensitive positions (SF-86) on July 26, 
2007. On January 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s undated and notarized answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on 
March 16, 2009. Applicant requested a hearing. However, at the time he requested his 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
hearing, Applicant was assigned to work overseas and did not expect to return to the 
United States until November 2009. The administrative judge assigned to the case 
contacted Applicant and explained that he could not hold Applicant’s case open until 
November 2009. He offered Applicant three options: he could timely return to the United 
States for his hearing; he could request that his hearing be conducted by video 
teleconference; or he could waive his right to a hearing and request a decision on the 
written record. After considering these options, Applicant requested a decision on the 
record in lieu of a hearing.1  
 
The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 8, 2009. 
The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated 
January 10, 2010, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions 
to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on February 8, 2010. His response was due on March 10, 2010. He did 
not file any information or objections within the required time period. On May 6, 2010, 
the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 14 allegations of financial delinquency under AG ¶ 18, 
Financial Considerations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n.) In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied 13 of the Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.j. and SOR ¶¶ 1.l. through 1.m.). He admitted the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.k.  
Applicant’s admission is entered as a finding of fact.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The following facts are established by the record provided by the Government in 
this case. The items include Applicant’s 2007 SF-86, his personal subject interview of 
August 30, 2007, his responses to DOHA interrogatories,2 and his 2007 and 2008 credit 
reports.  (See Items 5 through 9.) 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and employed overseas by a government contractor. 
He has been separated from his wife since 2004, and he communicates with her 
through his lawyer. They are in the process of divorcing. (Item 5 at 6.) 
 
 During their marriage, Applicant’s wife was responsible for the family finances. In 
2004, Applicant’s wife was unable or unwilling to pay the couple’s bills. She did not tell 
Applicant why she failed to pay their financial obligations. When they separated, 
Applicant believed he was responsible for his debts and his wife was responsible for her 
debts. (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
1 I obtained the communications between Applicant and the judge originally assigned to adjudicate his 
case. On my own motion, I have admitted those communications to the FORM as Item 4 A. 
 
2Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on August 30, 2007. On September 29, 2008, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
signed a notarized statement affirming that he had read the summary of the interview and found it to be 
true and correct. He made no changes, corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s summary. (Item 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was employed in aircraft maintenance by a company from July 1994 to 
October 2003. On his SF-86, he reported that he lost his job with the company and 
“there was a span of time where the bills fell behind.” His SF-86 notes that he began a 
new job, also in aircraft maintenance, in November 2003. He has been steadily 
employed since January 2005. (Item 5 at 3-5, 9.)  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $20,543 in delinquent debt 
to 14 creditors. Seven of the delinquent debts date to 2003; three date to 2004; three 
date to 2005; and one dates to 2006. (Item 1.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 13 of the alleged debts. He admitted 
one debt, a $245 account placed for collection in June 2005. In his Answer, he stated 
that he was making payments to the creditor and expected to make a final payment on 
the debt in January 2009. He failed to provide documentation to corroborate his claim of 
payment. (Item 4.) 
 
 When he was interviewed by an OPM investigator in August 2007, Applicant 
denied knowledge of 14 debts in collection status, one debt that was late 120 days, and 
a mortgage foreclosure of $45,500. He stated that he was current on all of his monthly 
financial obligations. (Item 6 at 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant also told the investigator that he had retained an attorney to advise him 
on his financial responsibilities. He told the investigator that he and the attorney planned 
to obtain and review his credit report. He stated that he would then contact creditors for 
those accounts that showed he owed delinquencies. If he determined that the debts 
were his, he would pay them. He stated that he wanted to have a good credit rating in 
the future. (Item 6 at 4.) 
 
 One year later, in August 2008, Applicant responded to interrogatories from 
DOHA about his delinquent debts and actions he had taken to resolve them. Applicant 
again denied 14 debts that DOHA identified as his. He further stated: “These debt[s] 
have been a shock to me. I have forward[ed] [these] items to my attorney. She is aware 
of this and is trying to resolve the matter.” (Item 7.) 
 
 The thirteen debts that Applicant denied in his Answer to the SOR are listed on 
his 2007 and 2008 credit reports. The Government’s evidence, which includes the credit 
reports, Applicant’s interview with an authorized OPM investigator, and his responses to 
DOHA interrogatories, establishes the Government’s prima facie case. Applicant failed 
to provide documentation to corroborate his claims that the debts were not his or to 
explain why he had not paid them. (Item 8; Item 9.) 
     
 The record does not reflect that Applicant has received financial counseling. 
Applicant provided no information about his income and current expenses. 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. To meet its burden, the Government must establish by substantial evidence a 
prima facie case that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest for an applicant 
to have access to classified information. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a 
security clearance, the applicant carries a heavy burden of persuasion. The "clearly 
consistent with the national interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable 
doubt about an applicant's suitability for access to classified information in favor of 
protecting national security.  
  
          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Beginning in about 2003 and 2004, Applicant accumulated 
substantial delinquent debt and did not pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
Several mitigating conditions could apply to Applicant’s case. If the financially 
delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might apply. If 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
Applicant and his wife separated in 2004. While Applicant claims that 13 of the 
14 delinquent debts alleged on the SOR and listed on his 2007 and 2008 credit reports 
are not his, he has failed to provide documentation to support his claim. The debts, 
which date from 2003 to 2006, have not been paid. Additionally, Applicant claimed he 
was paying the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k., but he failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate payment. 
 
The record does not establish that Applicant has participated in financial 
counseling, nor does it establish that Applicant’s financial situation has stabilized or is 
under control. Applicant accused his estranged wife of failing to pay their marital debts. 
He did not acknowledge that he too might be responsible for paying the debts. 
 
Applicant has been steadily employed since 2005. The record does not support a 
conclusion that his failure to satisfy his creditors is the result of circumstances beyond 
his control. After a careful review of the record and the few facts provided, I conclude 
that none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. 
Unfortunately, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his assertions that 13 
of the 14 debts alleged on the SOR were not his. His 2007 and 2008 credit reports 
established that the debts belonged to him. Moreover, he failed to provide 
documentation to establish payment of the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k.  He has not 
established a reliable track record of timely and consistent payment of his debts over 
time. Because he has not received financial counseling and appears to lack a clear plan 
for resolving his delinquent debts, it is likely that his financially delinquent behavior will 
recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.n.:            Against Applicant 
 
                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
