KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems began when she was a mature
adult, and she failed to address her delinquent debts for a significant period, giving rise to
concerns about her judgment and reliability.  Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not mitigated
the case against her in light of her promise to pay off her delinquent debts as soon as she cleared
up all the discrepancies in her credit report was sustainable.  Promises to pay off debts in the
future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts and otherwise acting in a financially
responsible way.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-10012.a1
DATE: 05/07/2010
DATE: May 7, 2010
In Re:
---------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-10012
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Willie Ann Towne Willcox, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 11, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 28, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
the Government had met its burden of production; whether certain of the Judge’s factual findings
were in error; whether the Judge’s credibility determinations were in error; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no harmful
error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is divorced and the parent
of a 12-year-old child.  A high school graduate, she is employed as a secretary by a government
contractor.  She has held a security clearance since 2001.
Applicant’s financial difficulties are the basis for the security concerns in this case.  She has
numerous delinquent debts, for such things as consumer goods, medical expenses, an automobile
purchase, and unpaid taxes.  Applicant was discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002.  In 2003
and again in 2004 Applicant petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but both times her petition was
dismissed for failure to make payments.  
Applicant married in 1995, divorcing in 2006.  She incurred significant legal costs as a result
of the legal proceedings attending the divorce.  Applicant and her ex-husband share custody of their
child and are both responsible for the child’s tuition in a private school.  However, the ex-husband
was injured on the job in January 2009 and has been unable to work since.  Consequently, Applicant
has assumed responsibility for the full amount of tuition payments.
Applicant lives with her child and her mother in an apartment.  Applicant and her mother
share expenses.  Applicant has consulted a bankruptcy attorney and two counseling firms about her
debts.  However, at the close of the record, she had not made a decision as to how to resolve her
indebtedness.  
The Judge stated, “Applicant has experienced financial difficulties since at least 2001, and
she has sought bankruptcy protection three times.  Most of the debts alleged in the SOR remain
unpaid and unresolved.  Applicant’s financial problems began when she was a mature adult, and she
failed to address her delinquent debts for a significant period, a decision that raises concerns about
her judgment and reliability.”  Decision at 8.  Accordingly, the Judge concluded that Applicant had
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising in her case.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that her financial condition raised
Directive ¶ E2.19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts[.]”1
Directive ¶ E2.19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]” 2
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FCDC) 19(a)  and 19(c).   We have considered1 2
Applicant’s argument in light of her admissions to the SOR and the record evidence as a whole.  The
extent of Applicant’s delinquent debts, some of which go back to the early 2000s, and evidence that
she twice filed for bankruptcy protection after recently having had her debts discharged under
Chapter 7 of the bankruptcy code, raise reasonable questions about Applicant’s ability or willingness
to satisfy her debts and certainly constitute a history of her not meeting financial obligations.
Accordingly, the Judge properly evaluated the case in the context of Applicant’s burden of
persuasion as to mitigation.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15 (After the Government presents evidence
raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns.)
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  For example, she contends that
one of the debts, $345 owed for cell phone services, was previously discharged in bankruptcy, rather
than remaining unpaid, as alleged in the SOR and found by the Judge.  However, Applicant admitted
this SOR allegation, relieving Department Counsel of any further requirement of proof.  Moreover,
the document which Applicant cites in support of her contention that the debt was discharged does
not reference this debt, and Applicant did not show that the debt was scheduled and discharged in
2002.  Rather, the document, Government Exhibit (GE) 9, appears to be the result of a Lexis search
that lists the dates pertinent to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy but does not actually mention specific debts.
Furthermore, even if the debt had been scheduled, its discharge would not have precluded it from
being disqualifying under FCDC 19(a) and 19(c), and a discharge, by itself, is not necessarily
mitigating under FCMC 20(d).  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001).
There is no error in the Judge’s finding.
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s finding that her two Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings were
dismissed due to non-payment.  Applicant admits that the 2003 bankruptcy was dismissed because
she failed to make payments.  Tr. at 58-59.  But, she contends that the 2004 case was dismissed on
her own motion, to facilitate the sale of a house.  Applicant Brief at 17.  GE 6, U.S. Bankruptcy
Court Docket Report at 2-3, demonstrates that both the Trustee in Bankruptcy and Applicant filed
motions to dismiss the 2004 Chapter 13 petition.  The Trustee filed the motion due to alleged non-
payment; no reason is given for Applicant’s motion.  GE 6 further demonstrates that the Bankruptcy
Judge granted Applicant’s motion.  Therefore, the Judge’s finding regarding the 2004 filing is not
supported by the record.  However, examining this error in light of the record as a whole, we
conclude that, even if it had not occurred, it is unlikely that the Judge would have decided the case
differently.  Therefore, the error is harmless.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec.
29, 2009); ISCR Case No. 01-23362 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006).  Other than this, the Judge’s
material findings of security concern are based upon substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶
E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”) 
Applicant states that she challenges the Judge’s credibility determinations.  The Directive
requires us to give deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In this
case, Applicant’s challenge appears to be merely disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
record evidence.  Accordingly, we find no basis to conclude that the Judge’s credibility
determinations were in error.  
Applicant claims that the Judge erred in her application of the pertinent mitigating conditions,
contending, inter alia, that Applicant had promised to pay off her delinquent debts once she “clears
all of the discrepancies found in her credit report.”   See, e.g., Applicant Brief at 11.  However,
promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying
debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible way.  See, e. g., ADP Case
No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).
We have considered the Judge’s treatment of the pertinent mitigating conditions and find no error
in them.  
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive ¶ E2.2(b).   
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple            
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
