                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )         ADP Case No. 08-11666
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On October 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that eligibility for occupying an ADP I/II/III position is clearly
consistent with the national interest, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether a trustworthiness determination should be granted,
continued, denied or revoked.
On November 19, 2004, the Undersecretary of defense (Intelligence) issued a
Memorandum signed by the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security), authorizing DOHA to provide due process in contractor cases for ADP,
ADP-II and ADP-III positions, exclusively under the provisions of DoD Directive 5220.6.
This case is adjudicated under the Guidelines set forth in that Directive, as it was sent to
the Applicant.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 24, 2009, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2010, and was scheduled for
hearing on April 1, 2010. A hearing was held as scheduled, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust position.  At
hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine exhibits, which were admitted as
exhibits 1 through 9. Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and five
exhibits, which were admitted as exhibits A through E. The transcript (Tr.) was received
on April 8, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of his permanent loan approval regarding his  residence, his
assumed mortgage obligations covered in subparagraphs 1.m and 1.o of the SOR, and
the judgment covered in subparagraph 1.a of the SOR. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. The Government was granted
two days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
copies of his judgment covered in subparagraph 1.a, first and second mortgage
approvals covered by subparagraphs 1.m and 1.o, and furnished a payment schedule
from the first trust holder covered in subparagraph 1.i. Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits
were admitted as exhibits F through L and considered.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) accumulated 13 debts
exceeding $154,000 and (b) and had a personal judgment taken against him December
2006 in the amount of $2,167. Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified
his public trust application (SF-85P), executed in July 2007 by denying any adverse
judgment taken against him.  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the listed debts without any
explanations.  He denied any intentional falsification of his application for a public trust
position (SF-85P) and attributed his omission to a misunderstanding of the nature of the
judgment covered by subparagraph 1.a.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old contract bid specialist for a defense contractor who
seeks a trustworthiness determination. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings
follow.
3
Applicant married in June 2005.  He has four children, ages 20, 16, 9, and 4,
three of whom reside with him.  See Ex. 1; Tr. 53.  All but his last child are from other
marriages of his wife and himself . Tr. 53, 56-57.
Applicant’s finances
Applicant and his wife purchased their first home in January 2005 and financed
their purchase with a $137,000 first mortgage with creditor 1.n.  See Exs. 6 and 7. In
April 2006, they purchased a second home and financed this purchase with a $363,985
first mortgage on the property from creditor 1.m.  See Exs. 6 and 7; Tr. 84.  Sometime
in the summer of 2006, they signed a rental agreement with a single mother with four
children to lease their first home for $1,167 a month. See Exs. F and H; Tr. 59.  Before
the prospective renter could move in, Applicant and his wife changed their mind and told
the renter not to move into their property. The renter defied the instruction and moved
into the home. Exs. F and G. Applicant and his wife followed with a 30-day notice to quit
the premises.  Court records document that the renter vacated the premises.
 In March 2008, Applicant and his wife obtained a home equity loan on their
second home from creditor 1.m in the amount of $91,000.  See Exs. 5, 6, and 7; Tr.
100-01.  They secured the loan with a second trust deed. Tr. 101.
At the time they purchased their second home, Applicant was making about
$80,000 a year from his construction job.  His wife earned $40,000 a year from her work
with a non-profit organization. Tr. 58, 60-61.  
Applicant and his wife encountered financial difficulties in 2006 and 2007 after
both lost their jobs. See Ex. C; Tr. 57-61. Applicant’s loss of work was due to a
weakening economy in his  community.  Tr. 106.  His wife contracted a West Nile virus
in the summer of 2006 that debilitated her and forced her to take indefinite leave from
her job. See ex. B ; Tr. 51-52. With their limited income from his wife’s disability income
and his own part-time jobs, they were unable to keep paying their bills and defaulted on
most of them.  Tr. 47.  
Realizing they could not keep up with their debts, Applicant and his wife explored
petitioning for bankruptcy in July 2007. See Ex. A; Tr. 62, 96-97.  Records show that
creditor 1.n assigned its $364,000 first mortgage to creditor 1.o in March 2007. See Ex.
9; Tr. 85.  However, creditor 1.n retained its second mortgage on Applicant’s property.
Ex. 9.  By August 2007, Applicant and his wife had fallen behind on their creditor 1.o
first mortgage and faced potential foreclosure.  See Ex. K.
When Applicant and his wife could not address their mortgage delinquency with
creditor 1.o, the latter initiated non-judicial foreclosure proceedings against the
borrowers in February 2008 and completed the foreclosure several months later. See
Exs.  9 and A; Tr. 84.  They continued to pay on their rental property for a number of
months before falling behind in their payments to creditor 1.n as well.   
4
In December 2009, Applicant and his wife petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
relief.  Records document their receiving the required financial counseling before filing
their petition.  Ex. A. In their joint petition, they scheduled $191,687 in secured claims
and $98,588 in unsecured debts.  See Ex. A. Petitioners included the charged off
second mortgage of creditor 1.m in their unsecured schedule, which  they reported as a
deficiency on their foreclosed second home.  See ex. A; Tr. 87-89.  Even though
creditor 1.m had previously charged off this debt following creditor 1.o’s foreclosure of
its first mortgage interest, it retained a potential deficiency claim for its sold-out junior
lien.  
In their Chapter 7 unsecured claims schedule, Applicant and his wife also
included a judgment claim of creditor 1.a in the amount of $2,167.  See ex. A; Tr. 72.
The judgment is linked to the rental dispute Applicant and his wife had with their tenant
of their first home.  Applicant characterizes the claim as a small claims judgment in the
claimant’s favor without any mention of a set-off. 
Applicant and his wife document their Chapter 7 discharge in March 2010.  Ex. A.
Except for any potential deficiency claims from creditor 1.o, all of the debts listed in the
SOR were scheduled in Applicant’s Chapter 7 petition. As a caution against any
deficiency claims that either creditor 1.m or other medical creditors who were not
scheduled in their initial Chapter 7 petition might wish to pursue (Tr. 63-72), Applicant
and his wife filed an amended bankruptcy petition on the date of their discharge.
Virtually all of these medical claims were included in Applicant’s initial bankruptcy
petition and were discharged.  See Ex. A; Tr. 67-79.
After the renter vacated their first home, Applicant and his wife sued in small
claims court for retention of the tenant’s $1,000 security deposit, a month’s rent, and
additional cleaning costs. See Exs. 3, F, and H; Tr. 59. The renter, in turn,
counterclaimed against Applicant and his wife for damages associated with repairs she
made to the property during her short tenure. Exs. 3, F, and H; Tr. 117. 
In its initial judgment, the court hearing the respective claims of the parties ruled
that the renter owed Applicant and his wife the $1,000 rental deposit, the first month’s
rent of $1,167, and cleaning costs of $747, for a total award of $2,914.  In turn,  the
court awarded the renter $2,167 on her counterclaim. This initial judgment allocation
made Applicant and his wife net judgment holders in the amount of $747.  See Exs. F
through I.  
At Applicant’s request, the court hearing his rental dispute reconsidered its
December 2006 judgment and entered an amended judgment in April 2007.  See Exs.
H and I.  In its amended judgment, the court substituted respective off-setting judgments
and deleted the net payment language in the initial December 2006 judgment. See Exs.
F through I.  The net effect of the court’s revision leaves the final result unchanged. Off-
setting judgments were entered that left Applicant and his wife with a net $747 award
entitlement from the renter.  
5
Between them, Applicant and his wife earn collectively about $86,000 a year. Ex.
A; Tr. 109.  They estimate they have a $793 monthly remainder that can vary some
from month to month. Tr. 113. With their current income, they have been able to
maintain possession of their second home. 
Creditor 1.n never tried to foreclose on their second home, and Applicant and his
wife continue to negotiate a remodification agreement that would, if agreed to by the
mortgage holder, reduce their monthly mortgage payments. See Ex. L; Tr. 88-89.
Applicant is confident that he and his wife will be able to renegotiate their mortgage
terms to meet their budget needs.  Tr. 90-92. He is encouraged, too, by his obtaining his
contractor’s license in March 2010 and is currently enrolled in the contractors state
license service. See Ex. C.  With his contractor’s license, he hopes to attract contracting
projects that will enhance his income.  
Applicant’s SF-85P omissions
Asked to complete an SF-85P application for a public trust position in July 2007,
Applicant failed to list his creditor 1.a judgment when responding to question 19.
Applicant attributed his omission to confusion over whether he was required to list a
judgment that was reported in his bankruptcy petition and was subject to a net setoff in
his favor. Tr. 118-31. Applicant assures that he did not intend to omit any outstanding
judgment from his questionnaire. Tr. 120.  He admitted to omitting his renter’s judgment
on her cross-claim in the belief that his judgment created a net collectible judgment in
his favor.
When first interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in August 2008, Applicant explained the rent-related judgments
and the circumstances surrounding them to the investigator without any prompting.  See
Ex. 3; Tr. 120-31.  There is nothing in the OPM summary to indicate that Applicant was
shown copies of the judgments before he volunteered information about them.
Applicant’s explanations for his judgment omission are entirely plausible and
corroborated by the documented off-setting judgments. It was never his intent to falsify
his application or acknowledge any kind of deliberate falsification of his SF-85P when
responding to the SOR.  Applicant’s explanations are credible and are accepted.  
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his supervisors and coworkers. His direct
supervisor for the past 13 months described Applicant as a “hard-working, dedicated,
loyal, and experienced” construction professional. See ex. E.  He credited Applicant with
being reliable and trustworthy and an outstanding asset to his employer. 
Applicant’s assistant facility manager described Applicant as a highly motivated
and valuable member of their staff and a very reliable resource. See Ex. E. Applicant is
6
praised as well by members of the Defense Department who work with him and his
coworkers. 
Policies
The AGs list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision making
process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of
the "Conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying”
(Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before
deciding whether or not a determination of eligibility to hold a public trust position
should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to
assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18
7
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
             By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position maybe made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility to hold a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to hold or maintain
a public trust position.  The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused sensitive information before it can deny or revoke an applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information
entrusted to him.  Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing
admitted or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the
purpose of establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation.
Analysis  
Applicant is a conscientious and well-regarded contract bid specialist for a
defense contractor who accumulated numerous debts during periods of his
unemployment and his wife’s medically-related layoffs in the 2007 time frame.  With the
limited resources available to him and his family, he encountered considerable difficulty
in keeping up with his accumulated debts.  Applicant has since petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy, received his discharge, and is presently awaiting court-approval of his
amendment. Applicant’s finances and his omission of a small judgment (subject to
offset) in his completed SF-85P raise initial security concerns.
8
Applicant’s finances
Trustworthiness concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline
of the Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended that he or she is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts, which heretofore he has not been
in a position to address, warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Adjudicative Guidelines for financial considerations: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s debts covered in his
discharged 2010 bankruptcy. Applicant and his wife both experienced prolonged job
losses and could not keep up with their mortgages and personal debts. MC ¶ 20(b) of
the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibility,” under the circumstances, applies to Applicant’ situation.
Because of the limited income available to Applicant and his wife following their
loss of stead employment, they could not find any way to address their individual debts
and petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. All of Applicant’s listed debts (including
the off-set judgment that ensued from his dispute with his renter) were scheduled and
discharged.  Applicant has no known outstanding debts at this time.
Based on Applicant’s shown extenuating circumstances and demonstrated  good-
faith efforts to resolve his debts through preliminary financial counseling and Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief, two additional mitigating conditions under the financial considerations
guideline are applicable to Applicant’s situation: MC ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual‘s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” and MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.” 
While Applicant is credited with making initial efforts to address his debts before
electing to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief, his efforts are not enough to warrant the
application of MC ¶ 20(d) of the guideline. The Appeal Board has never equated
bankruptcy discharge with good-faith efforts to repay creditors, and has never precluded
considerations of negative trust considerations from an applicant’s overall financial
history just because the applicant has exercised his right to seek a discharge of debts in
bankruptcy.  See ISCR Case No. 01-27082 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 5, 2003).
Holding a favorable trustworthiness determination involves the exercise of
important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and
candor.   Financial stability in a person cleared to access information covered by privacy
9
rights is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the
trustworthiness determination.  Applicant meets these high fiduciary requirements.
Both the applicable mitigating conditions of the financial guideline and whole-
person assessment of Applicant’s financial problems and special circumstances as a
struggling provider who experienced lengthy periods of unemployment conduce to dispel
concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness. Taking into account all of the
extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt accumulations, the
limited resources he has had to address them with, and the counseling and professional
bankruptcy services he has enlisted to address his debts, he mitigates trustworthiness
concerns related to his debts.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by the financial considerations guideline.
Personal Conduct issues associated with Appellant’s SF-85P 
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
also raised initially under the personal conduct guideline, as the result of his omission of
his renter’s judgment on her cross-claim in December 2006.  Applicant attributed his
omission to confusion over the status of the judgment. Applicant’s explanations are well
corroborated by the documented off-setting judgments he provided.  Once his former
tenant’s judgment on her cross-claim is off-set by Applicant’s affirmative judgment for his
security deposit, rent, and clean-up charges, Applicant retains a net enforceable
judgment of $747.  Under this set of circumstances, Applicant’s claims of having no
known enforceable judgment against him are plausible ones.  
Based on Applicant’s accepted explanations the judgment at issue, MC ¶ 17(f),
“the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability,” is fully
applicable to Applicant’s situation. Applicant’s omission of the renter’s judgment on her
cross-claim is absorbed by Applicant’s own judgment against his renter and deprives his
omission of any material significance.   
Overall, Applicant’s omission explanations are persuasive enough to warrant
conclusions the falsification allegations relative to his SF-85P omission of his neutralized
renter’s judgment on her cross-claim are unsubstantiated. Considering all of the
evidence produced in this record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
Guideline E allegations that Applicant knowingly and wilfully omitted a judgment taken by
his renter in the SF-85P he executed in July 2007. 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
10
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.o: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT 
Sub-para. 2.a: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public
trust position.  Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
