 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10983 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 29, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on January 28, 2010, and reassigned to me on February 25, 2010. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on February 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
March 11, 2010. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 19, 2010.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iraq. He also requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
about an alternate system to traditional banking, sometimes referred to as the “hawala” 
system. Applicant did not object to either request, and they were approved. The request 
and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. The facts administratively noticed are set out in 
the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents, which were marked AE I 
through K and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is 
marked HE III.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He was born in Iraq. He graduated from high school in Saudi Arabia. 
He attended high school in the United States but did not graduate. He is working on 
obtaining a General Educational Development (GED) high school equivalency 
certificate.1  
 
 Applicant’s father is in his 70s. He performed mandatory military service in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s. He was a member of the Ba’ath Party, as were other 
members of the military. Applicant was one of ten children, five sons (Applicant and 
brothers A, B, C, and D) and five daughters (E, F, G, H, and I). Three of Applicant’s 
brothers (A, B, and C) also performed mandatory military service and were members of 
the Ba’ath Party. His two oldest brothers (A and B) were killed by the Iraqi government. 
His oldest brother (A) was killed in about 1986, when he attempted to leave the army. 
His second oldest brother (B) was executed in about 1991, after he supported the Shi’a 
rebellion against the government of Saddam Hussein.2  
 
 Applicant’s father and brother (C) also supported the Shi’a rebellion. Applicant’s 
parents took Applicant, his younger brother (D), and three sisters (G, H, and I), and fled 
                                                          
1 Tr. a 31, 45-46; GE 1-5. 
 
2 Tr. at 13, 31-39, 96, 98-100; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
3 
 
Iraq in 1991, after the Iraqi government crushed the Shi’a rebellion and killed 
thousands. With the assistance of the U.S. military, they made their way to Saudi 
Arabia, where they lived in a refugee camp. His older brother (C) escaped Iraq on his 
own and met the family in Saudi Arabia. His two oldest sisters (E and F) were married 
and remained in Iraq.3  
 
 Applicant’s sister (G) married in Saudi Arabia. She immigrated to the United 
States in 1996. The rest of the family remained in Saudi Arabia in the refugee camp 
until 1997 when, with the exception of his older brother (C), they immigrated to the 
United States. Applicant was 16 years old when he came to the United States. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2003. His mother and two of his sisters (G and H) also became 
U.S. citizens in 2004, 2005, and 2006. His father, youngest sister (I), and younger 
brother (D) are permanent residents (green card holders). Applicant’s mother, three 
sisters, and brother all reside in the United States.4 
 
 Applicant’s brother (D) is serving in the United States Marine Corps. Applicant’s 
brother-in-law, H’s husband, is a U.S. citizen currently working in Iraq as an analyst 
supporting the U.S. Government’s mission.5  
 
 Applicant’s brother (C) returned to Iraq from Saudi Arabia. He is married. He and 
his wife are Iraqi citizens and residents. He is a cashier and stocker at a local store. He 
has no association with the Iraqi government.6  
 
 Applicant’s two oldest sisters (E and F) were married and remained in Iraq when 
the family fled Iraq. They are currently Iraqi citizens and residents. They are housewives 
with no association with the Iraqi government. Applicant’s brother-in-law, E’s husband, 
performed mandatory military service and was a member of the Ba’ath Party. Applicant 
is not close to his two brothers-in-law in Iraq.7 
 
 Applicant’s father returned to Iraq for a visit in 2006. While he was in Iraq, his 
permanent residence card expired. He has been unable to renew it and has remained in 
Iraq. He is not employed and has no association with the Iraqi government.8 
 
 Applicant has two cousins who are Iraqi citizens and residents. The cousins 
served in the Iraqi military and were members of the Ba’ath Party. One cousin currently 
serves on the Iraqi Police Force.9 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 12, 31-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-45, 93, 101-102, 105, 120-121; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
5 Tr. at 13-14, 28, 97-98, 103; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE E-H. 
 
6 Tr. at 100-101; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
7 Tr. at 102-106; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 93-97, 121; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant visited Iraq in 2005, 2007, and 2008. He traveled on his U.S. passport 
on each trip. In 2005, he was in Iraq for about three months and stayed with his brother 
(C) and his sisters (E and F). Applicant and his “wife” were married in a religious 
ceremony in Iraq in 2007. Their marriage was never formally certified by the Iraqi or any 
other government. Applicant believes he is married, and they treat each other as 
husband and wife, but because the marriage was not certified, he sometimes refers to 
her as his fiancée. She is an Iraqi citizen and is currently in Iraq. Applicant is in the 
process of sponsoring her to immigrate to the United States. She attends school to 
learn English. She has no association with the Iraqi government.10 
 
 Applicant has sent about $4,000 to his family in Iraq since about 1999. He sent 
about $2,000 by traditional means. He sent about another $2,000 using an alternate 
system to traditional banking, sometimes referred to as the “hawala” system. The 
hawala system is discussed below.11 
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He owns a rental property in the 
United States. He estimated the value of his U.S. assets at $120,000. He has voted in 
U.S. elections.12  
 
 Applicant is a valued and trusted employee. Several supervisors and military 
personnel sent letters on his behalf attesting to his patriotism and loyalty to this country. 
He is praised for his trustworthiness, professionalism, dedication, honesty, and integrity. 
He has volunteered his time by giving speeches to help local schools and the 
community. The character references recommend him for a security clearance.13   
 
Iraq  
 
The Iran-Iraq war (1980-88) devastated the economy of Iraq. Iraq declared 
victory in 1988 but actually achieved a weary return to the status quo antebellum. The 
war left Iraq with the largest military establishment in the Gulf region but with huge debts 
and an ongoing rebellion by Kurdish elements in the northern mountains. The 
government suppressed the rebellion by using chemical and biological weapons on 
civilian targets, including a mass chemical weapons attack on the Kurdish city of 
Halabja that killed several thousand civilians. 
 
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, but a U.S.-led coalition acting under United 
Nations (UN) resolutions expelled Iraq in February 1991. After the war, Kurds in the 
north and Shi'a Muslims in the south rebelled against the government of Saddam 
Hussein. The government responded quickly and with crushing force, killing thousands, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
9 Tr. at 13, 113; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 79-93, 112-113; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
11 Tr. at 113-120; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 117-118, 121-123. 
 
13 AE A-D, J, K. 
 
5 
 
and pursued damaging environmental and agricultural policies meant to drain the 
marshes of the south. 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power 
in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal of Hussein’s government 
from power, the United States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic 
institutions in Iraq. The Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free 
elections in 2005, Iraq's new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in 
March 2006.  
 
In 2007, 92% of Iraq’s exports were in crude oil and crude oil materials. Almost 
half of Iraq’s exports went to the United States. The United States’ ultimate goal in Iraq 
is to establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that will be an 
ally of the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has invested 
thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. Success 
in Iraq is a high national priority of the United States. 
 
Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul, and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
dangerous, volatile, and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with 
aggressive governmental action against terrorists by U.S. and Iraqi forces, the threat of 
terrorism in Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities 
as effectively as state intelligence services. 
Human rights concerns include a climate of violence; misappropriation of official 
authority by sectarian, criminal, and extremist groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances; torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or 
punishment; impunity; poor conditions in pretrial detention and prison facilities; denial of 
fair public trials; delays in resolving property restitution claims; immature judicial 
institutions lacking capacity; arbitrary arrest and detention; arbitrary interference with 
privacy and home; other abuses in internal conflicts; limitations on freedoms of speech, 
press, assembly, and association due to sectarianism and extremist threats and 
violence; restrictions on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement; large 
numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees; lack of protection of 
refugees and stateless persons; lack of transparency and widespread, severe 
corruption at all levels of government; constraints on international organizations and 
nongovernmental organizations’ (NGOs) investigations of alleged violations of human 
rights; discrimination against and societal abuses of women and ethnic and religious 
minorities; human trafficking; societal discrimination and violence against individuals 
based on sexual orientation; and limited exercise of labor rights. 
 
 
6 
 
Hawala 
Hawala is an alternative or parallel remittance system. It exists and operates 
outside of, or parallel to, “traditional” banking or financial channels. It was developed in 
India, before the introduction of western banking practices, and is currently a major 
remittance system used around the world. It is but one of several such systems used 
around the world. These systems are often referred to as “underground banking”; this 
term is not always correct, as they often operate in the open with complete legitimacy, 
and these services are often heavily and effectively advertised. 
The components of hawala that distinguish it from other remittance systems are 
trust and the extensive use of connections such as family relationships or regional 
affiliations. Unlike traditional banking, hawala makes minimal (often no) use of any sort 
of negotiable instrument. Transfers of money take place based on communications 
between members of a network of hawaladars, or hawala dealers. 
 
Hawala is used around the world to conduct legitimate remittances. Like any 
other remittance system, hawala can, and does, play a role in money laundering.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
7 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
  
Applicant’s wife/fiancée, brother, and two sisters are citizens and residents of 
Iraq. His father is an Iraqi citizen. His father was granted permanent residence in the 
United States, but he has been in Iraq since 2006. The presence of Applicant’s 
immediate family members in Iraq creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
  Applicant’s siblings in Iraq are married to Iraqi citizens. Applicant also has 
cousins that are Iraqi citizens and residents. Those extended family members do not 
create a potential conflict of interest or a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1k, and 1.l are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  There are no security concerns or disqualifying conditions raised by Applicant’s 
siblings who are Iraqi citizens and permanent residents of the United States. SOR ¶¶ 
1.e and 1.f are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Applicant traveled to Iraq in 2005, 2007, and 2008 to visit family members. That 
has no independent security significance.14 SOR ¶ 1.n is concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Applicant sent money to his family in Iraq. He sent about $2,000 through 
traditional means and about $2,000 through an alternative remittance system 
sometimes referred to as hawala. There is no evidence that Applicant intended to 
launder any money in the transactions. There are no independent Foreign Influence 
security concerns raised by the transactions. SOR ¶ 1.m is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). 
 
9 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 1997, and he has been a U.S. 
citizen since 2003. He has family members who performed mandatory military service in 
Iraq. That does not mean they supported the Saddam Hussein regime. Two of his 
brothers paid for their dissidence with their lives. Most of his family had to flee Iraq and 
lived in a refugee camp in Saudi Arabia until they immigrated to the United States. His 
brother is showing his patriotism by serving in the Marine Corps. Applicant desires to 
serve this country in another capacity. Applicant is clearly a loyal U.S. citizen. However, 
he has close family ties to Iraq, a country with continuing human rights concerns and 
that is subject to widespread violence by various terrorist, insurgent, and criminal 
elements. I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable to the 
security concerns related to his immediate family in Iraq.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also considered the 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
 
10 
 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.”15 The distinctions between 
friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with caution. Relations between 
nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly 
nations can have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view 
as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations 
have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, 
scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. Also very important is whether the foreign country 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Iraq has human rights issues, and it has been victimized by terrorism. The 
complicated state of affairs in Iraq places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his immediate family members in Iraq do not pose a 
security risk. Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who is only seeking to aid this country. 
However, he was unable to mitigate the considerable security concerns raised by his 
family in Iraq. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.n:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
