                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11034 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lifelong history of alcohol abuse which includes five serious 
alcohol-related incidents of misconduct. His last incident occurred in 2007. He relapsed 
in March 2008, while undergoing court-ordered treatment. Although he has been 
abstinent since March 2008, not enough time has passed to warrant a finding that his 
alcohol-related behavior is not likely to recur. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2008, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
August 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2009. He elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 23, 2009, was provided to him by letter 
dated October 26, 2009. Applicant responded to the FORM on November 18, 2009, and 
submitted material in refutation, extenuation, and mitigation. The case was assigned to 
me on December 14, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.d through 1.i, with some 
clarifications. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, and having considered Applicant’s answers to the SOR and the FORM, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old senior software engineer employed by a defense 
contractor. He attended college on-and-off from 1985 until 1991, when he received a 
Bachelor of Science degree in computer science and a minor in mathematics. He 
graduated from college with honors, made the Dean’s list five times, and is a member of 
an honor roll society. He married his first wife in October 1986, and divorced her in April 
2004. He married his current wife in February 2008. He has one adult-age child and two 
adult-age stepchildren.  
 
In his January 2008, clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he had 
received treatment for bipolar disorder since 1995, he was involved in numerous alcohol 
related incidents, and he was currently receiving alcohol-related treatment (Item 5 
Sections 23, 25, and 26). The subsequent background investigation addressed his 
alcohol consumption and alcohol-related misconduct. 
 
Applicant started consuming alcohol (whiskey, beer, and tequila) as a teenager. 
He described himself as an episodic binge drinker, but he also admitted to consuming a 
six pack of beer with a pint and up to a fifth of alcohol daily (Item 8). He consumed 
alcohol to the point of intoxication, losing his memory, and experiencing blackouts. His 
alcohol consumption led him to engage in criminal misconduct. At age 17, he was 
drinking with friends and they stole carpet from a home construction site he was working 
at. He later turned himself in. He was convicted of the larceny, served nine months in 
jail, and made restitution. 
 
In October 1981, Applicant rode his motorcycle while intoxicated and was 
involved in a serious accident. He was hospitalized for a long period of time and 
 
3 
 
 
required extensive medical care. He was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) 
and required to attend Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings. He stopped drinking 
alcohol from 1984 until 1991, because his alcohol abuse was jeopardizing his life 
(Response to the FORM). Applicant underwent psychiatric treatment for bipolar disorder 
and alcohol consumption from January 1995 until October 2004. He also received 
treatment for alcohol dependence from January 2005 until October 2006. 
 
In July 2006, Applicant consumed alcohol until he was impaired and drove his 
vehicle off the road. He left his vehicle and started walking. He was arrested for public 
intoxication. He has little memory of that night’s events because he blacked out. He was 
given a pre-trial diversion, paid fees and court costs, and received court-ordered alcohol 
counseling. He participated in alcohol rehabilitation treatment from August 2006 until 
November 2006. 
 
In June 2007, he was convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI). He was 
sentenced to jail (suspended), paid fines and court fees, awarded probation, and 
ordered to attend an alcohol rehabilitation program. His driver’s license was suspended 
for one year.  
 
In September 2007, Applicant consumed alcohol to excess, blacked out and was 
arrested for public nudity and public intoxication. He was convicted of public 
intoxication, sentenced to jail (suspended), paid fines and court fees, and was placed on 
probation. He was ordered to undergo an alcohol rehabilitation program, which he 
attended from October 2007 until May 2008.  
 
Applicant’s treatment records show he cooperated fully with the counselors and 
indicated he truly wanted help to control his alcohol addiction. He admitted increased 
tolerance to alcohol. He was drinking more than intended, having withdrawal symptoms, 
his use was interfering with his obligations, and he wanted to develop coping skills to 
maintain abstinence. He was prescribed medication to control his alcohol abuse. 
Applicant’s diagnosis included “alcohol dependence” and “bipolar I disorder, moderate” 
(Item 8). 
 
In March 2008, while undergoing court-ordered alcohol treatment, Applicant 
relapsed. He disclosed his relapse to his counselors seeking further help. 
Notwithstanding, he successfully completed his treatment program. At the end of his 
2008 treatment, Applicant had improved his condition, and his prognosis was 
considered “good.” He was referred to continued AA participation. 
 
During July and October 2008 follow-up interviews with a government 
investigator concerning his alcohol-related problems, Applicant was honest and 
forthcoming about his alcohol-related problems. He admitted that he has been 
struggling with alcohol addiction most of his life and that he suffers memory lapses 
because of his alcohol abuse. Applicant has been sober since March 2008, and 
consistently participates in AA meetings. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant attributed his alcohol problems to the emotional and physical abuse he 
suffered in foster homes and by adopted parents after his mother abandoned him, and 
his 2006-2007 alcohol-related problems to the break-up of his first marriage in 2004. In 
his answers to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant expressed remorse for his alcohol-
related problems. Applicant has taken personal responsibility for his actions. He averred 
he has been abstinent since March 2008. He voluntarily disclosed his 2008 relapse 
because he really wanted help. He claimed he currently attends AA meetings three 
times per week and benefits from the fellowship. He noted he is now remarried to a 
wonderful woman and they have a good relationship. He volunteers in his community 
helping the youth improve their leadership skills. 
 
Applicant believes himself to be reliable and trustworthy because of his continued 
success. He has been successful at his job during the last 25 years, and was successful 
on his own entrepreneurial business. He was hired in February 2008, by his current 
employer (a government contractor) as senior software engineer. His supervisors 
consider him to be an invaluable member of the team. He is reliable, trustworthy, 
ethical, thorough, and technically competent. He has good analytical skills and is well 
adjusted. He is dedicated to his family. They rely on his judgment unconditionally. 
 
Applicant’s AA sponsor since May 2008 describes his progress in the AA 
program as honest and sincere. He considers Applicant to be one of the most reliable 
and trustworthy persons he knows. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. They provide 
explanations for each guideline and list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s goal is to achieve a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government.2 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” (See Exec. 
Or. 10865 Section 7; and Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3) Thus, a decision to 
deny a clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It 
is merely and indication the applicant has not met the stringent guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G by showing that 
Applicant has a history of consuming alcohol to excess, extending from 1977, when he 
was 17, until March 2008, when he was 48 years old. His alcohol abuse led him to 
 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
6 
 
 
exercise questionable judgment as demonstrated by his involvement in five incidents of 
serious misconduct, including convictions for larceny, DUI, and public intoxication.  
 
Applicant was abstinent from 1984 to 1991. Around 1995, he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence. This diagnosis was affirmed in 1981, 2006, and 2007 when he 
was court-ordered to participate in alcohol-related treatment as a result of his alcohol-
related misconduct. He stopped consuming alcohol around October 2007, while 
attending court-ordered treatment. He relapsed in March 2008, and seeking further 
assistance, disclosed his relapse to his alcohol counselor. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has consumed alcohol after his March 2008 relapse. He does not intend to 
continue consuming alcohol in the future. 
 
Guideline G disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away 
from work, such as driving while under the influence;” AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” AG ¶ 22(d): 
“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;” AG ¶ 22(e): “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program;” and AG ¶ 22(f): “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program,” apply.  
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
 
7 
 
 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s initial diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence was in 1995. This diagnosis was affirmed in 1981, 2006, and 2007 when 
he was ordered to participate in additional alcohol-related treatment as a result of his 
alcohol-related misconduct.  
 
  Applicant’s alcohol consumption appears to be tied to his depression and 
diagnosed bipolar disorder. Since 1977, he has been repeatedly involved in serious 
alcohol-related incidents of misconduct. He has recognized the danger of his alcohol 
abuse and has stopped drinking several times. He also sought professional help several 
times. Notwithstanding, Applicant either has not been able to learn from his mistakes or 
he has not been able to control his impulses. Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents show 
alcohol impairs his judgment and that he has not been capable of controlling his 
impulses. 
 
  Applicant remarried and is in a stable relationship. He claimed he does not have 
any emotional or personal problems that could trigger his alcohol consumption. He is 
also doing well at work. He has acknowledged his alcoholism, successfully participated 
in alcohol counseling, has been abstinent since March 2008, and has been participating 
in aftercare counseling. His prognosis is good. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s favorable 
evidence is not sufficient to show it is unlikely his questionable behavior will recur. In the 
past, Applicant stopped drinking several times for long periods after alcohol 
rehabilitation treatment and medication. He was not able to control his impulses and 
resumed his alcohol consumption which led to additional misconduct. Not enough time 
has passed since his last relapse to justify a finding that his alcohol-related behavior is 
not likely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) were 
addresses under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant has been successful in his job for a government contractor since 2008. 
He is a mature man and a good worker. He has the support of his supervisors who trust 
him and laud his performance. He has sought help to overcome his alcoholism and 
seems to be doing well. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. These factors show some responsibility, 
good judgment, and mitigation.  
 
Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that, at this time, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
