  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02348 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has paid none of the 24 delinquent debts listed in the Statement of 
Reasons (SOR). Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an 
SOR on August 27, 2009, detailing security concerns under financial considerations.  
  
 
1 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 On October 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
December 22, 2009, I was assigned the case. On January 4, 2010, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing for a hearing held on January 27, 2010. At the hearing, the 
Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into evidence. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were 
admitted into evidence. On February 4, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a 
thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old investigations analyst who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 50) 
Coworkers indicate Applicant’s conduct is exemplary and she fully accepted the 
responsibility for financial situation. (Ex. E) Applicant displays high ethical standards, 
conscientious work habits, mature judgment, and fully and forthrightly admits her 
mistakes. (Ex. F)  
 
In 2006, Applicant wrote a check for groceries. At the time she wrote the check, 
she did not know there were insufficient funds in the account. (Ex. 4) In November 
2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with theft of property greater than $20 and 
less than $500 by check. (Ex. 2, Ex. D) She pleaded guilty, was fined $200, and 
sentenced to four days in jail. In December 2008, she paid $250.65 (SOR ¶ 1.y) in 
restitution. (Ex. 5, Ex. C)  
 
The SOR alleges 24 delinquent debts, which include 22 debts that total 
approximately $6,000. There is also a $2,717 delinquent loan debt (SOR ¶ 1. h) and a 
$22,724 debt which arose from a repossessed leased truck. (SOR ¶ 1. w). 
 
In 2003, Applicant thought she was purchasing a truck when in fact she was 
leasing it. (Tr. 28) She did not want a lease because of the expensive additional 
insurance required. (Ex. 4) Two weeks after the lease, the clutch needed repairs. Within 
two to three months of the lease, the vehicle needed additional repairs twice more 
including replacement of the power steering pump. (Tr. 29) She called the auto lot and 
told them to come and get the non-working truck. The auto company states Applicant 
owes them $22,724 (SOR ¶ 1. w). The creditor offered to settle this matter for $8,500, 
which she is unable to pay. (Ex. 6, Tr. 29)  
 
In 2001 or 2002, Applicant took out a personal loan which might have been used 
for medical treatment or for a car. (Ex. 4) Applicant owes $190 (SOR ¶ 1. o) on this 
loan. In 2002, she purchased a Saturn automobile for $7,000 with $280 monthly 
payments. A year and a half later, it was repossessed when she missed a payment. 
 
3 
(Ex. 4) She was told she could redeem the car by paying the $2,000 balance on the 
vehicle, which she was unable to do. The debt was initially $2,717 (SOR ¶ 1. h). She is 
unable to pay the current balance of $4,387. (Ex. 6)  
 
Applicant and her husband had seasonal contract work instead of permanent full-
time jobs. (Tr. 29) He was a pipe fitter and she worked in document control. (Tr. 38-39) 
These positions did not have health insurance. (Tr. 30) This contributed to their financial 
problems. (Ex. 4) Nine of the SOR debts, which total approximately $2,800, were for 
medical bills. Applicant and her two children were first covered by her husband’s 
medical insurance in 2006 or 2007. (Tr. 35) In 2005, Applicant’s husband obtained a 
full-time job as a locomotive engineer and in 2007; she obtained her current full-time 
job. (Tr. 30) Applicant asserts that as of December 2008, their financial picture had 
improved now that they have full-time jobs. They are able to pay their current 
obligations, but have not addressed the past-due debts. (Ex. 4)  
 
In May 2009, Applicant responded to written interrogatories. (Ex. 6) She disputed 
the six following debts, which total $1,642: $553 electric utility bill (SOR ¶ 1. b); $235 
medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. l); $66 medical (SOR ¶ 1. n); $203 (SOR ¶ 1. p); collection 
agency collecting a $470 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1. d); and $124 gas utility bill (SOR ¶ 1. 
f). She was unable to locate the following six accounts, which total $1,967 : the medical 
provider in a $379 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1. c); $50 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. q); $820 
medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. r); $558 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. u); $50 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. s); 
and, $110 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. t). She was unable to resolve the six following debts, 
which total $1,591: collection agency collecting a $226 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1. e); 
collection agency collecting a $246 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1. m); $190 (SOR ¶ 1. o); 
$176 loan obligation (SOR ¶ 1. v); $469 hospital bill (SOR ¶ 1. j); and $284 (SOR ¶ 1. 
k). 
 
An additional $20 debt placed for collection by a restaurant (SOR ¶ 1. g) was 
being investigated. She paid two debts of $44 and $191 not listed in the SOR. (Ex. 6, I-
19, I-20, Ex. A, Ex. B) In May 2009, she asserted she would pay a $41 debt (SOR ¶ 1. i) 
within the next few months.  
 
 In November 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (E-QIP) in which she listed a number of delinquent debts. 
Applicant is currently not receiving any calls or letters from creditors demanding 
payment. (Tr. 31) Applicant was first asked about her delinquent debts in January 2009 
and she answered written interrogatories about her debts in May 2009. (Ex. 4, 5, 6, Tr. 
48) Applicant’s husband’s annual salary is approximately $33,000 as is her annual 
salary. (Tr. 49)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant has 22 unpaid debts, which total approximately $6,000, an unpaid 
loan of approximately $3,000, and a repossessed leased vehicle which the creditor has 
offered to settle for $8,500. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by her and her husband’s 
previous job history. They worked seasonal contract work until 2005 when her husband 
obtained a full-time job as an engineer and in 2007 when she obtained her current full-
time job. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the debts remain unpaid and were 
numerous.  
 
The nature of Applicant and her husband’s prior jobs did not offer medical 
insurance. Nine of the SOR debts totaling approximately $3,000 were for medical 
services provided when Applicant did not have medical insurance. This is a factor 
beyond her control. Medical debts will not be a problem in the future because both her 
job and her husband’s job have medical coverage for their family. AG & 20(b) has 
limited applicability.  
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling and the debts remain unpaid. 
She appears to be meeting her new obligations and is not receiving any calls or letters 
from creditors demanding payment. Since the debts have not been paid there is no 
clear indication the problem has been resolved. AG & 20(c) does not apply.  
 
For AG ¶ 20 (d) to apply there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” 
to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of 
handling her debts is needed, which is not present here. 
 
In May 2009, Applicant disputed six debts, which total $1,642. For AG ¶ 20 (e) to 
apply there must be a reasonable basis to dispute the past-due obligations and 
Applicant must provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
Applicant has provided no documents related to the dispute of these six debts. AG ¶ 20 
(f) does not apply because affluence was not alleged.  
 
Whole-person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. A number of the debts incurred were 
not the type that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the 
SOR were not incurred on luxuries. Nine of the debts involved medical treatment. 
 
Now that Applicant and her husband have full-time jobs they appear to be 
meeting their current financial obligations. However, the 24 SOR debts remain unpaid. 
In January 2009, Applicant was questioned about her unpaid obligations. Since then, 
she has been able to provided documentation that she has paid three debts, which total 
approximately $500. It is noted that four of the unpaid debts were each for amounts of 
$50 or less. An additional ten of the debts were each for amounts of $250 or less. 
These 14 unpaid debts, more than half of the SOR debts alleged, total approximately 
$2,000 and remain unpaid.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her unpaid financial 
obligations. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Consideration: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.y:  Against Applicant 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
