 
 
 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04220 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire (e-QIP) on August 1, 
2008. On September 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) which became effective within the Department of Defense 
on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 23, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 3, 2009. The case was assigned to me on November 17, 2009. The hearing 
was originally scheduled for February  9, 2010, but was cancelled because of inclement 
weather. On February 24, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing 
for March 19, 2010. The case was heard on that date. The Government offered five 
exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant 
testified and offered eight exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - H. 
The record was held open until April 2, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
 
 
 
2
documents. She timely submitted eight documents that were admitted as AE I - P. 
Department Counsel’s response to the post-hearing submissions is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant submitted an additional document after the record closed which 
was admitted as AE Q. Department Counsel’s response to AE Q is marked as HE II. 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 1, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all SOR allegations.   
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. She has worked for her current employer for 
approximately five months. She previously worked for another Department of Defense 
contractor from July 2008 to December 2009. She served on active duty in the United 
States Navy from 2001 to 2006. She separated at the grade of E-4 with an honorable 
discharge. She holds a TOP SECRET clearance. She is separated from her husband 
and her divorce proceedings are pending. Two children were born of the marriage, a 
five-year-old son and a two-and-a-half-year-old daughter. (Tr. 5-8, 42; Gov 1)  
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that she has 
nine delinquent accounts which total approximately $81,458. Of that amount, $75,030 
relates to the first and second mortgages on a home Applicant purchased while on 
active duty in the military. (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i) The seven remaining accounts are medical 
bills, which total approximately $6,428. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g)  
 
When Applicant was on active duty and stationed in another state, she and her 
husband purchased a home. When she separated from the military, the real estate 
market took a downturn and she was unable to sell the house. The house was rented. 
The tenant did not pay rent and damaged the house. They could not afford to pay the 
mortgage payment without a tenant paying rent. Eventually, the home was foreclosed. 
The $19,575 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is the amount owed on the first mortgage after 
the foreclosure sale. Applicant believed that the first mortgage was paid off during the 
foreclosure sale. She believed that she owed nothing for the first mortgage. She will 
attempt to work out a payment plan. (Tr. 31-33, 77; Gov 2 at 9)  
 
The $55,455 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is for a second mortgage on the home 
that was foreclosed. The account has been charged off. Applicant attempted to contact 
the creditor to work out a payment plan, but was unsuccessful. (Tr. 31-33; Gov 2 at 9) 
 
Most of the medical bills are for her children. Both of her children have been 
diagnosed with a rare genetic disorder that may affect their eyesight. She takes the 
children for a medical assessment every four to six months. Her son has had 17 
surgeries. She has medical insurance. She paid approximately $3,000 to $4,000 in 
medical bills over the past two years. (Tr. 39-40; Gov 2 at 6) 
 
 
 
3
Applicant is in a dispute with a former employer regarding the $766 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.  There was a gas leak at the office where Applicant worked. She 
was hospitalized as a result. She believes workman’s compensation should cover this 
bill. She was not provided the correct information initially on how to file a claim. She is 
currently filing the workman’s compensation claim. She is concerned they will deny the 
claim because she is filing after more than a year after the incident. She will make 
arrangements to pay the bill if workman’s compensation does not pay the bill. (Tr. 54-
57; Gov 2 at 6) 
 
The medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $2,964 are for medical expenses 
Applicant suffered as a result of a car accident in March 2008. Another driver caused a 
four-to-five vehicle accident. Applicant was paid by the insurance company. She was 
responsible for paying the hospital. She did not pay the hospital because around the 
time that she was reimbursed by the insurance company, her husband’s physical abuse 
towards her began to escalate. She used the insurance payment for expenses related 
to her separation from her husband. (Tr. 34-37; Gov 2 at 9)  
 
In May 2008, her husband was arrested. He did not move back into the marital 
residence after his arrest. Applicant and her husband formally separated in September 
2008. They share joint custody but she has physical custody of the children. Applicant 
was unemployed from March 2008 to July 2008. After separating from her husband, she 
soon found a job. Her husband does not pay child support. Applicant believes her 
husband does not make enough to pay child support. He also has alcohol problems. 
The divorce will be final in late May 2010. (Tr. 38, 43-44; Gov 2 at 9; AE A) 
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,800. At the time of the hearing, she was 
paying $800 in rent. She recently moved in with her parents to save money and pay 
bills. When she was renting, she had approximately $350 left over each month after 
expenses. None of her monthly expenses were frivolous. She has one open credit card 
account which had a limit of $300, but had a balance of $600. Applicant was two  
months past due on the card. She has not been making charges on the account. The 
balance has been increasing because of the high interest rates. (Tr. 62-75; AE Q)   
 
Applicant claimed that she was caught up with the medical bills from the 
university hospital where she takes her children for medical appointments. She is 
making payment arrangements with another local hospital. (Tr. 10, 29-30, 37; Gov 2 at 
6) While Applicant admits responsibility for these medical accounts, it is noted that the 
credit reports do not provide the name of a specific creditor, which makes it difficult to 
find the original creditor. (Gov 3; Gov 4; Gov 5) 
  
After the hearing, Applicant provided billing statements from the university 
hospital. The statements reveal Applicant has been making payments on the accounts. 
One statement has a balance of $682.20 (AE M); one statement has a balance of 
$182.56 (AE N); and one statement has zero balance. (AE O)  
 
 
 
 
4
In April 2010, Applicant found a part-time job which will pay her $13 an hour. She 
will work 20 hours a week for a period of eight weeks. She intends to use the extra 
money to pay debt. (AE P) 
 
Applicant’s references speak highly of her character and work ethic. Her former 
team captain states that Applicant is an exceptional individual. He is aware of her 
personal challenges. He states, “It is apparent that she has developed the life skills 
necessary to cope with hardship of any kind without impact on her work, or more 
importantly, her integrity.” He trusts her ability to handle classified information and 
personal information without concern or compromise. (AE B) A fellow co-worker states 
Applicant is dedicated and diligent towards her security responsibilities. (AE C) Her 
immediate supervisor at her previous employer found her “to be consistently pleasant, 
tackling all assignments with dedication and a smile.” He indicates Applicant is an 
excellent worker and a model employee. (AE D) A performance evaluation completed in 
August 2009 was highly favorable. (AE E) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG 
&19(c), (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. 
Applicant has had financial difficulties since at least 2008. The SOR alleged Applicant 
has over $75,030 in delinquent accounts.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies. While Applicant has not completely resolved her delinquent debts, 
the nature of these debts should be considered. The two largest debts relate to a home 
foreclosure. Applicant had the misfortune of needing to sell a house when the housing 
 
 
 
6
market experienced a significant downturn. The seven remaining debts consist of 
medical bills. Most of the medical bills relate to the care for her two children’s chronic 
medical conditions. One medical bill should have been covered by workman’s 
compensation for injuries Applicant suffered as a result of an on-the-job gas leak. There 
are no significant delinquent consumer debts. Applicant lives within her means. She 
decided to reduce her living expenses by moving in with her parents. She found a part-
time job. She is a single mother supporting two children with chronic medical conditions. 
Her financial situation does not raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. Applicant’s largest debts resulted 
from the downturn of the housing market. Her two children’s medical conditions and her 
pending divorce are factors beyond her control. While she could have immediately paid 
off the medical bills related to her car accident when she received the insurance money, 
considering that she was in the process of leaving an abusive relationship and used the 
insurance money to relocate herself and children is understandable. Applicant has one 
credit card account that is above the limit, but aside from her medical bills and mortgage 
foreclosure, her financial situation is relatively stable. I find circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control contributed to her financial situation and she has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.       
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. She is making progress 
on her medical debts. The mortgage foreclosure debts are unlikely to be resolved in the 
future.   
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the medical debts. Applicant has not 
paid all of the medical debts but she is working on paying them in full.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) applies to the medical debt which arose because of a gas leak at Applicant’s 
place of employment. Applicant is filing a workman’s compensation claim.  It appears to 
be a legitimate claim. 
 
Overall, Applicant has acted responsibly towards her finances considering the 
nature of the delinquent debt and the factors beyond her control that contributed to her 
financial problems. She has mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
7
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
service in the U.S. Navy. I considered that Applicant purchased a home while on active 
duty and stationed in another state far from her home of record. I considered her 
attempts to sell and rent her house during a time when the housing market took a 
downturn. I considered that the other delinquent accounts are medical bills. Applicant 
has taken reasonable efforts to manage her finances. She recently became a single 
mother, caring for two children who have chronic medical conditions while receiving no 
child support. She paid several medical accounts and is filing a workman’s 
compensation claim for one of the medical accounts. She lives within her means and 
does not have an excessive amount of credit card debt. After the hearing, she moved 
back in with her parents to save money and obtained a part-time job. Applicant has 
encountered a lot of adversity over the past two years. While it may be a while for 
Applicant to fully resolve her remaining delinquent accounts, the nature of these 
accounts do not raise questions about her trustworthiness, judgment, and reliability. I 
find Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations and met her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
8
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Chief Administrative Judge 
