                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02405 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 9, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 17, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on April 14, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Department Counsel provided Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I, which reflected the date the SOR was sent to Applicant.1 Applicant 
testified and offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. The record 
was held open until April 26, 2010, to allow Applicant time to submit additional 
documents. He submitted AE B through F. Department Counsel’s response is contained 
in HE II. There were no objections and the exhibits were admitted and the record 
closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. He 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He attended college for three years, but did not earn a 
degree. He is not married and has no children. 
 
 Applicant has worked for the same employer since October 2005. He is 
attempting to obtain a security clearance in order to work for a federal contractor. After 
being hired by his present employer, he moved into an apartment in December 2005. 
There was a special promotion from the apartment complex for reduced monthly rent 
based on a one-year lease. Applicant received the promotional rental rate. He was 
unexpectedly transferred by his employer in July 2006 to another state. Applicant 
subleased the apartment to a friend. The friend stopped paying the rent and Applicant 
became responsible for one and a half months back rent. Applicant terminated the lease 
and told the landlord that he would pay $1,251 for the missed rent. According to 
Applicant, the landlord calculated the amount Applicant owed for the “back concessions” 
to be $6,797, in addition to the back rent. A judgment was entered against Applicant on 
January 2, 2007, for the owed rent in the amount of $1,251, and is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
The “back concessions” amount is listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. It has not been paid. Applicant 
contends that he does not owe the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. He has not provided evidence to 
document his dispute of the debt or contact with the creditor to resolve it. Applicant 
stated he attempted to pay the judgment, but could not locate the creditor. In 
approximately January 2010, he sent a check for the amount of the judgment to the 
courthouse where the judgment was issued. His credit report shows the judgment was 
paid in January 2010.2  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($15,647) is for a repossessed car Applicant purchased in 
April 2008. He bought the car new and it cost $27,000. He traded in his truck. He was 
transferred again by his employer and his income was reduced. He moved to a high 
cost of living area, where he determined that he could not afford the car and he did not 
need it. He stopped making car payments around November or December 2008. 
Applicant provided an unsigned letter dated May 1, 2009, asking the creditor to provide 
1 The SOR was undated.  
 
2 Tr. 23-27; 30, 46-48, 51-53, 57-69; AE A, B, C, D, E. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
him assistance with his debt. He was unable to refinance the loan. He returned the car 
to the creditor as a voluntarily repossession sometime between July and September 
2009. He has not made any payments on this debt. In his post-hearing submission, 
Applicant stated he is currently negotiating a payment arrangement with the creditor.3 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($964) is for medical services. Applicant disputed this debt 
because he stated it was to be paid by his medical insurance. He provided in his answer 
to the SOR a copy of a letter from the creditor dated May 13, 2008, requesting payment. 
Applicant provided a fax cover letter addressed to a person using only the first name 
and requesting he be contacted by telephone. The date of the fax is May 21st, but it did 
not include the year. Applicant acknowledged that he received a bill from the medical 
provider. In his answer he stated:  
 
I had insurance at the time of the claim; however the claim was submitted 
by the hospital with errors, which refused to pay the claim. I was unaware 
of this until it hit m[y] credit file. No attempts prior to May 2008, [were] 
made to contact me regarding this account.4  
 
Applicant stated he has been unable to resolve this debt and had initiated a 
three-way conference call between the parties to address it. He continues to have the 
same insurance company and does not know what more he can do to resolve the debt. 
He stated he is not responsible for the payment of this debt. In his post-hearing written 
statement he stated he attempted to have the information removed from his credit file by 
contacting the parties. Applicant has not provided any relevant documentary evidence 
to substantiate his dispute.5  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($18,910) is owed on a credit card opened in 
approximately 1999. He stopped making payments on the debt in 2000. He was aware 
that the debt existed and believed he did not have to pay it because it was charged-off 
He made a statement to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on 
December 31, 2008, that he had attempted to work with the collection company to 
resolve the debt. He believed the original amount he charged was about $7,500. In 
approximately 2003, the collection company offered to settle the debt for approximately 
$9,000. Applicant did not have the lump sum amount to pay it, so he did not do 
anything. He stated his plan was to research the debt to determine if he still legally 
owed the debt. The balance at that time was $14,731. He stated he would also 
determine if he could negotiate a lower amount to settle the debt. He intended to 
contact the creditor about the account and try to resolve it within 90 days.6 At his 
3 Tr. 29-36, 49, 53-57; AE D. 
 
4 Record. 
 
5 Tr. 27, 69-70. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
hearing, Applicant admitted he did not follow up with the creditor. He stated it was not 
on his credit report, so he did not feel like he was obligated to pay it. 
 
In his answer to interrogatories dated June 24, 2009, Applicant stated the 
balance on the debt was now $21,079. The creditor offered to settle the debt for $7,828, 
and Applicant countered with a settlement offer of $1,565. He has not received an 
answer from the creditor and has not made any payments on the debt. In his post-
hearing written statement, Applicant stated he contacted the creditor, but has not 
received a response. Applicant’s position is that if a debt was charged off there was no 
one to pay, so he did not have to pay. He stated: “My understanding was charged-off 
was they had absorbed the debt and I was not responsible.” He admitted there were 
many years that he was aware of the delinquent debts and did not pay them before they 
were charged off.7  
 
The judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($3,373) and 1.g ($3,229) are owed to the same 
creditor. Applicant stated one debt is for a loan and the other a credit card. He obtained 
the loan through the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he 
stated in 2002 he obtained the services of a financial consultant. He provided a copy of 
his letter dated June 28, 2002, addressed to the creditor offering to settle the debt. 
Included in the settlement offer is also the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. He stated in his letter the 
following settlement arrangement offer: 
 
All four accounts to be consolidated into one new account, with the old 
accounts being removed from my credit files;8 
 
Debt forgiveness for approximately 48% from the total amount of these 
accounts; for a new balance of $15,000; 
 
Repayment terms as follows: initial payment of 10% ($1,500) and monthly 
installments of $1,125 thereafter on the balance, for one year; 
 
After two months of timely payments received from me, your (sic) notifying 
all three credit bureaus of the current status of the new account to reflect 
R1 “pays as agree” notation.9 
 
In his answer to the SOR, he stated that because he did not receive an answer to 
his letter from the creditor for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, he was told, 
presumably by the financial consultant, the accounts would be removed from his file in 
seven years; hence, Applicant did nothing to resolve the accounts. Applicant admitted 
that because the creditor did not accept his settlement offer he decided not to pay the 
7 Tr. 36-42; 70-79, 102. 
 
8 It is unclear what the fourth debt was. It is not alleged.  
 
9 Record. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
debts.10 In his post-hearing response Applicant stated: “I would even state that this debt 
failure came in 1997 as a result of me losing my job, and having to deal with the loss of 
my father, as indicated on my credit file.”11  
 
Applicant does not have a budget. He does not keep track of his checkbook. He 
is attempting to understand his financial issues, although they have not been a priority 
in the past. He was unemployed from March 2009 to June 2009. He received back pay 
of $4,400 for being unlawfully terminated from his job. He gave his mother $1,500 and 
loaned his friend $2,000 to purchase a car. He stated he did not understand his credit 
history and he is going to correct it. He intends to become financially stable. He believes 
he is an honest person, who tries to take care of his obligations and does not lead a 
frivolous lifestyle.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
10 Tr. 27-28, 42-45, 79-84. 
 
11 AE E. 
 
12 Tr. 90-102. 
 
6 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a history of being unwilling or unable to meet his financial 
obligations 2000. He has debts that remain unpaid and delinquent. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because his delinquent debts remain unpaid. He 
resolved one judgment against him, but did not provide documentary proof that he paid 
or disputed his delinquent debts or paid the remaining judgments. Applicant does not 
have a budget or a realistic plan for resolving his debts. At this juncture, his financial 
stability is questionable. I cannot find that the circumstances are unlikely to recur. I find 
his inaction regarding addressing his delinquent debts casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant 
began having financial problems in 1997, when he was unemployed, and again in 2005, 
when he had to move due to his job relocation. AG ¶ 20 (b) partially applies. In order for 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, Applicant must provide proof that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances, which he did not do. Applicant has 
delinquent debts dating back to 2000. He has done little in the past ten years to address 
his financial problems. He recently paid a judgment against him, but provided no proof 
that he has made any payments on his other debts or judgments. I find he did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence that Applicant received 
financial counseling to stabilize his finances and resolve his debts. He made a 
settlement offer on one debt, but has not resolved the debt. He promised during his 
interview with the OPM investigator that he would follow up on his debts, but failed to do 
so. I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has made a good-faith 
effort to repay his creditors or that the problem is being resolved or under control. I find 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant disputes some of his delinquent debts, 
but did not provide relevant documentary evidence to substantiate the basis of his 
disputes, as required under AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 42 years old. He 
admitted that he has not focused on his finances in the past. He owes $48,000 in 
delinquent debts, which date back to 2000. Although certain events in his life affected 
his financial status, he took minimal action to address his debts over the past nine or ten 
years. In January 2010, he paid a judgment that was entered in January 2007. He does 
not have a budget or a plan for resolving the other debts, nor has he made payments on 
any of them. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:   Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
