 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01294 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on January 28, 2010, and reassigned to me on February 25, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on February 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
March 10, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents, which were 
marked AE D through G and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
his current employer since August 2008. She is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
She attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. She is married. She has a 
six-year-old child, a three-year-old child, and twins less than a year old. She also has a 
12-year-old stepchild who lives with the child’s mother.1  
 
 Applicant and her husband were just barely getting by financially until she was 
laid off her job in December 2004. When she finally found another job, it was at a much 
lower pay. She was recalled to work at the first job and their finances stabilized again. In 
about January 2007, her husband obtained a job in another location. The costs of 
maintaining two households until the family could move to her husband’s location took a 
toll on their finances. Applicant was unemployed again for several months in 2007. 
Applicant and her husband purchased a large truck in order to be able to transport the 
entire family. They could not afford the large loan payments and the high gas costs. 
They used loans in order to maintain the truck, but it was eventually voluntarily 
repossessed. They were unable to pay all their bills, and several debts became 
delinquent.2    
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts. The debts were listed on credit reports 
obtained on November 15, 2008 and September 21, 2009. Applicant admitted owing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.h to 1.k. She denied owing the debts in the 
remaining allegations. The status of the debts alleged in the SOR is addressed below. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 
and 1.m to 1.p because she did not recognize the creditors. All the debts were listed on 
the 2008 credit report. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f were also 
listed on the 2009 credit report. Applicant and her husband had medical insurance and 
she thought all their medical bills had been paid. She has not formally disputed any of 
the debts.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a delinquent debt of $288 owed to a collection company, 
collecting on behalf of a cellular telephone services company. Applicant had a contract 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33, 68, 73-74; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-28; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 44-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
3 
 
with the company several years ago and ended the service before the end of the 
contract. She never received a final bill and did not realize there was a balance due.4   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a delinquent debt of $10,728 owed on the deficiency on a truck 
loan after Applicant’s truck was voluntarily repossessed in about February 2008. 
Applicant and the collection company handling the debt agreed to settle the debt for 
$5,500 in June 2009. The settlement agreement called for three monthly payments of 
$100 in July through September 2009, followed by a $5,200 payment in October 2009. 
Applicant made five payments of $108 to the collection company, one in July, two in 
August, and two in September 2009. She was unable to make any additional payments 
because she was placed on bed rest and unable to work for several months pending the 
birth of her twins. She received disability, which she estimated was about 75% of her 
regular pay. Applicant intends to resume making the monthly payments.5  
 
 Applicant admitted that she was 30 days and $1,040 past-due on a car loan, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She made payments in about August 2009 to bring the debt 
current. The loan then became delinquent again while she was on bed rest. The car 
was repossessed in about October 2009.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a delinquent debt of $2,370 owed to a collection company, 
collecting on behalf of the landlord of an apartment where Applicant and her family used 
to live. Applicant had insect problems at the apartment that the landlord refused to fix. 
She withheld rent and the landlord issued a notice to evict them. They then moved out. 
Applicant did not receive her deposit back. She disputed owing $2,370, because 
another tenant moved into the apartment the next month. The debt is listed on the 2008 
credit report, but not the 2009 report.7   
 
 Applicant denied owing the $236 delinquent debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a telecommunications company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q. She stated that she 
did not recognize the companies. The debt is listed on the 2008 credit report, but not the 
2009 report.8  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.r alleges a delinquent debt of $851 owed to a collection company, 
collecting on behalf of a chain restaurant. Applicant disputed owing the debt. There is 
no evidence that Applicant ever owed $851 to the restaurant The 2008 credit report 
listed the debt with a balance of $32. The debt is not listed on the 2009 report.9   
                                                          
4 Tr. at 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C. 
 
6 Tr. at 51-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 55-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
8 Tr. at 63-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
9 Tr. at 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the remaining debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.h, 
and 1.j. The total amount owed on those four debts is $3,017. The debts range from $37 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) to $1,503 (SOR ¶ 1.e) owed to a jewelry store. None of the debts have 
been paid.10 
 
 Applicant had not received financial counseling as of the date of the hearing. 
After the hearing, she researched a well-known financial advisor through the internet. 
She has plans to attend classes provided at a local church. She and her husband are 
able to pay their current debts on their combined income, but they have little 
discretionary income after their bills are paid. She stated that it will take time, but she 
plans to address her delinquent debts.11   
 
 Applicant is a valued and trusted employee. Her supervisor praised her 
exceptional job performance, as well as her ethics, honesty, and integrity. Additional 
letters attest that she is hardworking, forthright, reliable, trustworthy, and responsible. 
The character references recommend her for a security clearance.12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
10 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
11 Tr. at 71-73; AE D, G. 
 
12 AE A, B, E, F. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant still has a number of delinquent debts. Her financial issues are current 
and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by her periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. She also lost income when she was placed on 
bed rest before the birth of her twins. These qualify as conditions that were outside her 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant acted responsibly when she brought her 
car loan current and she started paying back the deficiency owed on a car loan after her 
truck was voluntarily repossessed. However, she stopped the payments while she was 
on bed rest, and they have not yet resumed. She was unable to maintain her car loan 
payments, and another car was repossessed. I am unable to determine that she has 
acted completely responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counseling as of the date of the hearing, but 
she has researched a well-known financial expert and she plans on attending classes at 
a local church. That is a good start. Applicant clearly can benefit from counseling and 
advice on how to manage her money. However, at this point, her finances are not being 
resolved and are not under control. Her limited payments to date are insufficient to 
support a finding that she has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve her 
debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
7 
 
 Applicant has not formally disputed any of the debts she denied owing. However, 
her testimony about the disputed debts was credible. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.l through 1.r. It is not applicable to the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, because she admitted she had cellular telephone service 
with the provider and she terminated the service before the end of the contract.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also found Applicant to 
be honest and candid about her finances. I believe she is sincere about getting her 
finances in order. However, she is not close to reaching that point, as evidenced by her 
car being repossessed while she was in the process of attempting to pay the deficiency 
owed on her truck that was repossessed. Applicant is a good and valued employee. 
Hopefully her company will maintain her position until her finances are more conducive 
to the holding of a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.r:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
