 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03794
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
On January 29, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant two sets of interrogatories  to clarify or augment potentially1
disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing the results of the
background investigation and Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
information. On October 23, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise disqualifying security concerns addressed in
the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on December 18, 2009. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on
December 30, 2009, I convened a hearing in this matter on January 21, 2010. The
parties appeared as scheduled. The Government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 - 5),
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
proffered two exhibits (Ax. A and B), which were admitted without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on January 29, 2010. The record closed on
February 16, 2010, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. They are
admitted collectively and without objection as Ax. C.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes approximately
$12,196 for 13 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.m). In response to the SOR, Applicant
admitted with explanation the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i - 1.k, and 1.m. He
denied with explanation the remaining allegations. Based on a review of Applicant’s
response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following findings of
relevant fact.
Applicant is 46 years old and employed by a defense contractor. He requires a
security clearance to perform the duties of his position as a trainer of military personnel
in microwave and satellite antenna maintenance. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in
October 1984 and received an honorable discharge in November 1991. His primary
mission responsibility was in the field of teletype communications, antenna repair, and
satellite communications. He held secret and top secret clearances when he was in the
Army. (Gx. 1; Tr. 5 - 7)
 
Applicant has been married twice. His first marriage lasted from December 1984
until he was divorced in August 1998. He re-married in August 1999. He and his second
wife have been separated since 2005, and a finalized divorce is pending. (Gx. 1; Tr. 54)
Applicant has five children (ages 25, 23, 21, 19, and 14). The two youngest, both from
his second marriage, live with him. (Gx. 1; Tr. 35)
When Applicant and his second wife separated, he moved to the state where he
currently resides, and he still had to pay for all of the marital and household expenses.
However, he could rely on only his income to do so. While they were together, she
handled their finances because he was always working. Applicant was not always well-
informed about their bills and expenses when he and his wife were together, and it
3
appears that as the marriage deteriorated several bills went unpaid. When he submitted
his e-QIP, he disclosed that he had several past due debts. This was confirmed through
a credit report obtained during his background investigation that showed he was
delinquent on the debts listed in the SOR. (Gx. 5) Applicant knew he had some past due
debts, and he had already resolved a delinquent car insurance debt for $223 (SOR ¶
1.m) in February 2009. But he was unaware of the true extent of his credit problems
until he was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2009. Acting on the
investigator’s advice, he began contacting his creditors to resolve his debts. He also
enrolled in his bank’s credit reporting and monitoring service, through which he
successfully disputed the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c because they should have
been paid by his employer-provided medical insurance. The bills were resubmitted to
the insurance company and the debts were removed from his credit report. Applicant
also successfully disputed the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.k, which were also removed
from his credit report because they were not his. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 26 - 30, 39, 45;
Ax. A)
The debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.j were incurred as part of his employment
between October 2004 and December 2007 as a satellite television systems installer.
He was given a free satellite television subscription and a cell phone to use on the job.
However, when he was laid off, those accounts were assigned to him. He paid the
satellite television account (SOR ¶ 1.h) in March 2008. (Tr. 32 - 33, Ax. C) The cell
phone account (SOR ¶ 1.j) is being paid through a debt repayment plan, discussed
below.
As part of his efforts to resolve his debts, Applicant researched several debt
management and credit repair services. He eventually settled on a company that
demonstrated to his satisfaction that they would actually start repaying his debts when
he gave them his money instead of, as occurs most often, taking their fee up front for
several months while the debts continue to languish. In December 2009, he enrolled in
a repayment plan through which he is repaying the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and
1.k. He pays $220 each month through automatic deductions from his checking
account. Those debts, which total about $9,706, will be paid off in 2012. Even before he
enrolled in this program, he was making payments to the creditors listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d
and 1.e. (Tr. 27, 46 - 47; Ax. B; Ax. C)
Applicant has a positive monthly cash flow and he has not incurred any new
debts. The only new blemish on his credit history is a state tax bill for $319 in unpaid
income taxes for tax year 2008. This debt arose from a mistake in his tax return for that
year, and Applicant has made arrangements for the state to take the money out of his
refund for tax year 2009. (Gx. 2; Tr. 49 - 53)
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation among his professional and personal
associates. He is successful in his work and his references repeatedly cite his reliability,
honesty, hard work, and integrity in all facets of his work and personality. (Ax. C)
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of available relevant and material
information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the5
adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in
¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept,
those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who6
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.m; that is, that Applicant owed $12,196 for 13 delinquent debts.
Available information showed that those debts were past due since at least 2005 and
that some of them are still being resolved. Accordingly, the record requires application
of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
In response to the SOR and at hearing, Applicant established that the debts
alleged were primarily the result of the failure of his second marriage. He showed that
the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c, 1.g, and 1.k were not his responsibility, and that he
had paid the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, and 1.m. Additionally, he established that he had
started trying to resolve his debts as early as February 2009, and that he is now
repaying his remaining debts through an organized plan which uses automatic
withdrawals from his checking account to ensure timely payment. Applicant’s finances
are sound  and his circumstances have changed sufficiently that his financial problems
are unlikely to recur. 
Based on all of the foregoing, the record supports application of the mitigating
conditions at AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control); AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts); and AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence
of actions to resolve the issue). On balance, I conclude that the security concerns about
his unpaid debt are mitigated.
 See footnote 5, supra.8
6
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Available information shows that
Applicant, 46 years old, is a mature, responsible adult. He honorably served his country
in the U.S. Army, where he learned the skills for which he was hired by his current
employer. He has a stable history of employment since leaving the military in 1991, and
his current job performance is excellent. Further, Applicant has been candid and
forthcoming about his finances at all stages of his background investigation and
clearance adjudication. His testimony at the hearing was credible and straightforward.
Available information shows that Applicant was already acting to resolve some his debts
when he applied for a clearance. The action he has taken since his July 2009 subject
interview reflects well on his judgment and decision-making. The totality of information
bearing on Applicant’s circumstances supports a conclusion that he his financial
circumstances will not be a security concern in the future. A fair and commonsense
assessment  of all available information bearing on Applicant’s past and current8
circumstances shows he has addressed satisfactorily the Government’s doubts about
his ability and willingness to protect the Government’s interests as his own. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
