                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04073 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B.1 The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 15, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 23, 2010. The hearing was 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR was undated. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled for April 14, 2010. Due to an error on the SOR, the hearing was rescheduled. 
On April 20, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, and on May 5, 2010, the hearing 
was conducted as rescheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and two witnesses testified 
on his behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 11, 2010.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 The Government requested administrative notice be taken on exhibits marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I through XVII, which was granted. I have considered for 
administrative notice purposes the source documents provided as hearing exhibits. HE 
XVII is the Government’s Administrative Notice Brief, which I will consider only for 
persuasive purposes. I have also carefully considered for administrative notice 
purposes only those source documents that pertain to the factual specifics of the 
country from the Government sources and other credible sources. I have not considered 
any editorial or extrapolated comments or conclusions from unofficial sources. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 1.j. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was born in the United States to American parents. 
He earned a bachelor’s degree in East Asian studies and a master’s degree in teaching 
English as a second language. He has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, since October 2005. He is unmarried and has no children. Applicant has 
never held a security clearance. He is an East Asian linguist who is fluent in Chinese, 
Japanese, and other dialects.2 
 
 Applicant studies languages and has a continued interest in learning about East 
Asian cultures. He is fluent in Japanese and taught English for approximately seven 
years in Japan, from 1990 to 1997. He is also a student of the Chinese language. In 
approximately September 2001 to July 2002, he was employed as a teacher at 
University A in the People’s Republic of China (China). He found the job through the 
internet and was employed directly by the university. University A is located in a remote 
city in China. Part of his compensation included room and board, including an 
apartment provided by the university. Applicant’s purpose for teaching in China was to 
improve his Chinese language skills. He explained that in China every high school and 
college has a person assigned whose responsibility is to “keep tabs on foreigners” and 
also to control the students in the class. For purposes of the hearing he referred to this 
person using an American term, the “Foreign Affairs Officer (FAO).” The FAO is also 
concerned about foreigners attempting to influence and persuade students on political 
2 Tr. 26, 37-40.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
issues. The foreign teachers are advised not to discuss certain issues, such as China’s 
relations with Taiwan. Applicant was aware that the FAO was monitoring him, but he 
was not being targeted for information from a national security position. After completion 
of his teaching contract in July 2002, Applicant returned to the United States to visit his 
family.3  
 
 In August 2002, Applicant accepted a new teaching assignment at University B, 
in China. He taught both English and Japanese at this school. He did not complete his 
contract because in March 2003, he returned to the United States due to a medical 
condition. He remained in the United States from March 2003 until September 2003. He 
worked as a substitute teacher while in the United States. He explained that despite his 
medical condition, he was determined to learn Chinese, so he returned to China. His 
primary goal was to learn the language. He was aware that China was going to be an 
important country to the United States and internationally in the future. He felt that his 
marketability for career enhancement would increase if he could learn Chinese. He 
returned to China in September 2003 and worked at University C, until his return to the 
United States in January 2005. He continued to study the Chinese language and culture 
while there.4  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that once he left the three Universities he had no 
further contact with the institutions. He explained that he is a serious student of the East 
Asian culture and his interest is in the Chinese culture and language, and not the 
politics of the government. He provided AE B, C and D to show how the Chinese 
government bears responsibility for the destruction and deterioration of the Chinese 
culture. The articles also detail the corrupt nature of the Chinese government.5 He 
explained that he did not want to tangle with the Chinese government. He was aware 
that it was corrupt but his purpose for returning to China was to achieve his own goal to 
become fluent in the language and have a deeper understanding of the culture. His 
teaching efforts were to help students, not the government.6  
 
 Applicant formed some relationships with his students while teaching in China. 
He would assist some outside of the classroom by sending them English books. He 
maintained some contact with students after moving to a different school. Usually the 
contact was by email. The contacts faded over time.7  
 
 Applicant had a romantic interest with a student. He consulted the dean of the 
university and was told to wait until the student graduated and then he could pursue his 
romantic interests. He left the university and they visited each other once in 2002 or 
3 Tr. 26, 47-52. 
 
4 Tr. 52-70. 
 
5 AE B, C, D at page 20. 
 
6 AE A, B, C; Tr. 70-76. 
 
7 Tr. 79-80. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
2003, while he was in China. He had one telephone contact with her in 2004 and has 
had no other contact since then. He had another romantic interest outside of school. He 
dated the person for about three months in 2004. He has had no contact with her since 
then. During his teaching experience from 2001 through 2005, he never had any 
student contact him requesting money, information, or anything of a questionable 
nature. The students did not ask him about his political philosophy, nor did anyone at 
the universities where he was employed.8  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleged Applicant’s five former tutors were citizens and residents of 
China and one was affiliated with the Chinese Communist Party. In September 2006 
through December 2006, Applicant’s present employer allowed him to take a sabbatical, 
so he could return to China to hone his Chinese language skills. To do so he hired 
tutors to be conversation partners with him. Applicant’s medical problem involves his 
jaw and he can not speak for long periods of time, so to accommodate his problem he 
developed a learning style. He would listen to them and they would teach him 
vocabulary. He was attempting to improve his skills in two different Chinese dialects, 
one of which is very complicated. The sabbatical was unpaid, but supported by the 
company. During this time, Applicant immersed himself in the Chinese language and 
culture. He explained that language is learned by listening. He was tutored by two 
people at a time, for two-hour periods of time, two to three times a week. His 
relationship with the tutors was strictly professional. He found the people through a 
college and also by posting an advertisement. He had a student visa while in China. He 
has maintained some minimal contact with the tutors.  
 
One tutor told Applicant she was a member of the Communist Party. She did not 
want contact with Applicant because of the implication it may present to her status in the 
Communist Party. She was one of the few who could teach the complicated dialect 
Applicant was attempting to learn. Their contact was only professional. Applicant’s last 
contact with her was in 2007, when they exchanged emails. Applicant had asked her to 
record lessons for him and send them to him via the internet. This was part of his 
continuing education to learn the language. She recorded the lessons and was paid for 
her services. Applicant has had some email contact with the other tutors, usually short 
social emails, and some computer “chat” contact. He became interested in one tutor 
romantically in 2007. They corresponded over the internet from January 2007 to May 
2007, when the relationship ended. Their only contact during this time was through the 
internet. They occasionally will have email contact.9  
 
 Applicant explained that if anyone ever asks him what his profession is, he tells 
them that he is a translator and an educational researcher.10  
 
8 Tr. 80-85, 92. 
 
9 Tr. 101-130, 144-145. 
 
10 Tr. 130. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged Applicant has a friend who is a citizen and resident of China. 
Applicant admitted that when he studied in China in 2006, he met a waitress. They were 
attracted to each other, but he has not seen her since December 2006. They last 
emailed each other in 2009. If she emails him he will likely respond. He met her once 
socially outside of the campus. She was also a student. He never discussed his job.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleged five former students of Applicant are citizens and residents of 
China and two of them are employed by the Chinese government. He has not had 
contact with them since 2008 or 2009. They are all students he met when he was a 
teacher from 2001 to 2005. He taught them for either one or two semesters. He listed 
them on his security clearance application (SCA) because he had kept in contact with 
them. The contact he had was by email, internet chats, and an occasional phone call. 
He described them as good students with whom he got along. He believed two of the 
students worked for the government of China. One was a teacher, and because all 
schools are controlled by the government, he assumed she was employed by the 
Chinese government. Another student had a job as a water meter reader, which he 
assumed was also government controlled. Their employment came up through normal 
social conversation, so he disclosed it on his SCA. He last saw the students in 2005.12  
 
 Applicant’s contact with Chinese citizens was part of his education process to 
become fluent in the language and different dialects. He explained that social contact 
was a valuable learning tool. His contact with Chinese citizens was never work related.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged Applicant had contact with two former coworkers who are 
citizens and residents of China. These coworkers were both teachers and he had both a 
professional and personal relationship with them when he worked there from 2003 to 
2005. He has had infrequent email contact with them in 2009 and 2010. Occasionally he 
might be on a computer “chat” site and will have contact with them.13  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleged Applicant has a friend and former coworker who is a citizen of 
the United Kingdom (UK) and resides in China. Applicant met his friend at University A, 
where they both taught English. Both being westerners, they became friends and have 
maintained their friendship. His friend helped Applicant get the job at University C. They 
talk to each other four to five times a year and maintain contact. His friend is married to 
a Chinese citizen. Applicant stated that he seriously doubts she is a member of the 
Communist Party because it would be unorthodox for a member to marry someone with 
western ties. Applicant does not know if they have children, but is aware that his friend 
has family in the UK.14  
11 Tr. 131-137. AE A at page 5 is an exhaustive document prepared by Applicant that lists all of his 
Chinese contacts, when he last had contact with them, and the type of contact.  
 
12 Tr. 137-142. 
 
13 Tr. 146-147. 
 
14 Tr. 93, 149-153. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleged Applicant has another friend who is a citizen of China and 
resides in the United States. Applicant met this friend in 2002, at a swimming pool. The 
friend was going to school. He obtained a scholarship to attend medical school at an 
American university. Applicant believes he will be completing his medical degree soon. 
He has been in the United States for four to five years. Applicant stated that when they 
were in China, his friend intended on returning to practice medicine there. The friend 
now intends on remaining in the United States and has accepted a job here. Applicant 
and his friend talk on the phone two to three times a year and have talked about 
meeting sometime this year.15  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant’s two current tutors are citizens of China and 
reside in the United States. At the time Applicant completed the SCA these people were 
his tutors. They are no longer his tutors. He advertised for tutorial services on the 
internet. One tutor was a student at a local American university, where she was 
studying teaching Chinese as a second language. She was Applicant’s tutor for eight to 
nine months. They would meet one or twice a weekend for about three hours. She 
taught traditional Chinese. She was in the United States on a student visa. When their 
contract ended, he ceased to have contact with her and he does not know her 
whereabouts.16  
 
 When the contract with his first tutor expired, Applicant hired another tutor. She 
was attending an American university and studying to teach Chinese as a second 
language. She tutored him for approximately eight months. He had contact with this 
tutor about once a week for three-hour sessions. He has had no contact with her since 
sometime in 2009, except for one phone call when he called her to wish her a happy 
Chinese New Year. His contact with both tutors was always at the school and there was 
no social relationship.  
 
 Applicant stated he and his family are loyal Americans. He does not have divided 
loyalties. Members of his family have served in the military and deployed overseas. Two 
are affiliated with the United States intelligence community. He is close with his family in 
the United States. He has no family in China and does not have close personal contact 
with any Chinese citizens. He has no financial interest in China. All of his financial 
assets are in the United States. He has had no contact with the universities in China 
where he was previously employed.17  
 
 When asked by Department Counsel what Applicant would do if he were 
approached by someone soliciting classified information, Applicant provided an actual 
situation that occurred in 2007. While sitting at a book store café Applicant was reading 
Chinese related material. A woman at the café noticed and began a conversation with 
him. They decided to have dinner together. In the normal course of the conversation, 
15 Tr.95 98, 153-157. 
 
16 Tr. 157-166. 
 
17 Tr. 99, 167-169, 171-173. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
the woman asked Applicant if he had a security clearance. Applicant believed that she 
was Chinese. He thought her question was unusual. Although he did not have a security 
clearance, Applicant reported the activity to the security manager of his company. He 
has had no contact with the woman since then. Applicant has never sponsored anyone 
for immigration to the United States.18  
 
 Applicant’s coworker and friend testified on his behalf. He knows Applicant both 
professionally and socially. He has known Applicant since 2005. Both work as Chinese 
linguists. The coworker holds a Top Secret security clearance. He believes Applicant’s 
unique language skills would be beneficial to national security. He explained that 
Applicant is very conscientious in protecting sensitive matters and believes he would 
avoid any security risks. They worked on a joint project for three months where they 
were Chinese translators. He considered Applicant’s work product to be superior. He 
explained that with Applicant’s unique language skills he is qualified for the type of work 
the company does. One must be mentally tough and mature. He does not believe 
Applicant will put himself in a compromising position.19  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He has known Applicant since 
October 2005. He strongly supports Applicant’s application for a security clearance. He 
believes Applicant is an honest and loyal American. Applicant is extremely careful when 
it comes to security and goes beyond what is normally required of him. He is a good 
worker.20  
 
 Applicant has not had contact with the schools in China where he taught. He has 
had infrequent short emails or chats with people from China. He does not have any 
strong personal relationships with people he knows from China. He has not traveled to 
China since he left in 2006.  
 
 Applicant provided copies of emails and chat room conversations, and their 
translations. He also offered various documents about China and his performance 
appraisals. He is consistently graded as “Distinguished” which is the highest grade. His 
most recent performance appraisal described him as a team player who can always be 
relied on. Specifically it stated: “he is an accomplished linguist who has built a strong 
reputation with our customer as a detail oriented researcher.”21 I have considered all of 
the documents provided by Applicant. 
 
 
 
18 Tr. 174-182. 
 
19 Tr. 183-190. 
 
20 Tr. 193-198. 
 
21 AE G. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
People’s Republic of China22   
 
 China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. China has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in targeting sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology, and economic intelligence. It has targeted the U.S. with 
active intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. In China, authorities have 
monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, 
and internet communications. Authorities opened and censored mail. The security 
services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to 
computers, telephones, and fax machines. All major hotels had a sizable internal 
security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and searched for 
sensitive or proprietary materials. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
22 HE I through XVII. 
 
9 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions and especially the 
following:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Communist Party, with 
a poor human rights record, and targets the U.S. for espionage. Applicant has had 
contact with Chinese citizens while living in China and in the United States. His contact 
has included students, tutors, friends, and professional associates. Some of his 
contacts have included people who work for the Chinese government and at least one 
was affiliated with the Chinese Communist Party. The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s contacts are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk 
of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a contact is associated with or dependent upon the foreign 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
Applicant’s foreign connections marginally create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have 
been raised by the evidence.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”23 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.24 
 
I have analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions for 
this security concern under AG ¶ 8, including the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
23 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2005).  
 
24 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant is a devoted student to the East Asian culture and the Chinese 
language. He began his studies in college and continued to increase his knowledge and 
understanding by immersing himself in the culture. He is dedicated to being proficient 
and fluent in different Chinese dialects. He is astute in recognizing the value of 
increased career opportunities and marketability because of his unique and sought after 
expertise. As part of his educational process he spent time in China to learn and refine 
his language skills and become familiar with the culture, which is also part of the 
learning process. While there he had both personal and professional contact with 
Chinese citizens. He has maintained some contact through email and an occasional 
phone call, but has no personal relationship with most of the people alleged in the SOR. 
He does have occasional contact with a Chinese medical student that lives in the United 
States and intends on remaining here. His contact with his tutors, both in China and the 
United States, has been for professional reasons. On a couple of occasions, his 
professional contacts became more social, but over the years, the contacts have 
tapered off or no longer exist. He had contact with one tutor who was a member of the 
Communist Party. As he explained, it was frowned upon for her to socialize with 
westerners. Two contacts were likely Chinese government employees. Applicant also 
had a British friend in China whose wife was Chinese. They socialized and remain 
friends. Applicant has not been to China since 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s has cultivated his expertise in the Chinese language and culture for 
career development. The nature of his relationship with the Chinese citizens included on 
the SOR was mostly professional and occasionally personal. He no longer has contact 
with most of them, and those that he does, it is through email or phone calls. His contact 
either no longer exists or is so minimal and slight that it is highly unlikely he will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between these people and the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is unquestionable. There is no conflict of 
interest. Applicant does not feel a sense of loyalty or commitment to the acquaintances 
he had while living in China, or since then. Even if certain contacts could be 
characterized as “friends” there is no evidence he feels a commitment to them that 
would outweigh his deep, longstanding, and unquestionable loyalty to the United States. 
Even if there was a conflict of interest, it is clear that Applicant would resolve it in favor 
of the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s contacts with Chinese citizens in China and in the United States are 
so vague and infrequent, that they barely rise to the level of him having a “casual” 
contact or communication. However, even if it did rise to that level there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Therefore, after 
analyzing all of the facts, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply.  
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
devoted his professional life to learning about East Asian cultures and the Chinese 
language. To become an expert in the area, he studied in China, honing his skills. Part 
of the process is being immersed in the language, which means he obviously must have 
contact with Chinese people. Most of his contacts were professional, but occasionally 
he would become friends or even romantically involved. Most of those contacts while he 
was in China do not exist any longer. He has maintained some email contacts and an 
occasional phone call with some of his acquaintances, but none of these, except 
perhaps two, rise to the level of friendship. Those two are his British friend living in 
China, and the friend who is a medical student, living in the United States. Even these 
contacts would not rise to the level that would cause Applicant to be placed in a position 
of having to choose between his loyalty to the United States and his friends. There is no 
question that his sense of loyalty to the United States is deep and longstanding.  
 
Applicant is keenly aware of the responsibilities and obligations associated with 
having a security clearance. Although he did not have a security clearance at the time, 
he exercised incredible security awareness and mature judgment when he reported to 
his security manager, a conversation he had with a Chinese woman, who inquired if he 
held a security clearance. Applicant’s foreign contacts do not pose a security risk. The 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign 
Influence.  
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
