KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant failed to demonstrate a track record of debt repayment sufficient to mitigate
the security concerns in his case.  The Board cannot consider new evidence.  Adverse decision
affirmed. 
CASENO: 09-02926.a1
DATE: 05/11/2010
DATE: May 11, 2010
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-02926
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 8, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On March 30, 2010, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm the Judge’s adverse security clearance
decision. 
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: Applicant underwent periods of
unemployment while working for several employers.  One period of unemployment lasted from
January 2008 until April 2008.  Applicant then worked as a real estate loan officer until October
2008.  The pay for that job was based on commission, and Applicant did not earn enough to support
his family.  At the same time, Applicant’s wife was on unpaid maternity leave.  Applicant missed
payments on his debts because of his reduced income in 2008.  Applicant admitted that he owes
approximately $50,000 in delinquent debt.  The delinquencies include a mortgage, a second
mortgage, two credit cards, a loan for a television, a car loan, and a deficiency due to the voluntary
repossession of a car.  At the time the Judge was considering the record, Applicant also had student
loans that were in forbearance.  Applicant and his wife have met with an attorney to seek advice on
filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 13.  They have developed a plan for dealing with the delinquent
debts and discharging them within five years under bankruptcy.  Applicant will meet with the
attorney again in late March 2010  to file for bankruptcy.  Applicant is sure he will be able to make
the payments required under the plan ($630 per month) while resuming his mortgage payments
($1,153 per month) and keeping up with current expenses.
In his appeal brief, Applicant states that he does not dispute the Judge’s factual findings, but
asks that the Board grant him a clearance based on the evidence already in the record and on new
evidence he provides in his brief. Applicant explains steps he is currently taking to file for
bankruptcy and otherwise improve his financial situation.  As in the record below, Applicant
indicates that he has a plan under which all of his debts will be discharged within five years after he
files for bankruptcy.  Applicant also includes letters of recommendation and other information about
his financial circumstances.  To the extent that the information was not already in the record below,
it constitutes new evidence, and the Board cannot consider it.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Also,
Applicant seeks a continuance to allow him to develop additional (favorable) evidence.  An applicant
is not entitled to a delayed or deferred adjudication of his or her security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-22044 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2008).  Compare ISCR Case No. 05-06059 at 2 (App.
Bd. Mar. 2, 2007), in which the Board stated that it “does not review cases de novo, and has no
authority to continue Applicant’s case to allow [him] to work on [his] financial problems.”     
On appeal, Applicant emphasizes his plan to be debt-free within five years.  The Judge
considered Applicant’s plan in her decision, but stated that Applicant “has not established a track
record of financial reform.”  Decision at 5.  Board decisions indicate that promises of future payment
are not a substitute for a track record of debt payment or other responsible approaches.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009).  
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against his financial history and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and factors.  Decision at 4-5.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  Id.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4,  2007).  The Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision,  “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Sgined: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
