1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03475
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concern generated by his employment dismissal
in 2004 for viewing pornography on the job, but failed to mitigate the security concern
generated when he falsified the circumstances of his departure during a subsequent
security clearance investigation. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
I did not admit GE F though H.1
2
Applicant answered the SOR on July 21, 2009, admitting all of the allegations.
He requested an administrative determination. On August 28, 2009, Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant then requested a
hearing, and the case was assigned to another administrative judge who scheduled it
for December 10, 2009. The case was continued, then reassigned to me on December
15, 2010. On January 13, 2010, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for
February 4, 2010. The hearing was conducted as rescheduled. I received two
Government exhibits, six Applicant exhibits, marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through
E and I,  and the testimony of three Applicant witnesses. At the close of the hearing, I1
left the record open at Applicant’s request to allow him to submit additional exhibits.
Within the time allotted, he submitted five additional exhibits that I admitted as AE J
through N. The transcript was received on February 16, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old married man with two adult children. A prior marriage
ended in divorce. He has been married to his current wife since 2001. In 1973,
Applicant earned a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering. He has spent
his entire career working for defense contractors and has held a security clearance for
35 years. (GE E) Since June 2008, he has worked as a senior systems engineer. He
supervises 25 to 30 people. Applicant has received multiple awards on the job for his
“critical leadership,” “personal accountability,” and “exceptional achievements.” (AE J -
N)
For approximately six to eight months in 2003, Applicant “lost track of his moral
and ethical bearings” and began viewing pornography on his then-employer’s work-
issued laptop computer. (GE 2 at 4) None involved children. In approximately February
2004, Applicant’s then-employer discovered this activity through a routine audit of the
company’s computers. (Tr. 32) Applicant admitted to this behavior upon being
confronted and was fired immediately. (Tr. 33)
Applicant obtained another job approximately two months later. (Tr. 33) On June
2, 2005, Applicant completed a security clearance application. He answered “no” in
response to Question 20. Your Employment Record (Has any of the following
happened to you in the last 7 years? - Fired from a job - Quit a job after being told you’d
be fired - Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct - Left a job
by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory job performance - Left a job
for other reason under unfavorable circumstances). He did not disclose the
circumstances of his departure from his previous employer because he “was absolutely
terrified” that the information “would get out into the open.” (Tr. 34, 35)
In June 2006, a DoD security clearance investigator interviewed Applicant. When
asked why he left his previous job, Applicant again did not disclose the circumstances of
his departure. (GE 2 at 3) He testified that he failed to disclose it because he could not
3
confirm that the person was a security clearance investigator because the interview
occurred over the telephone. (Tr. 36) The record evidence indicates the investigator
conducted the interview at Applicant’s job site. (GE 2 at 3) 
In 2007, another investigator interviewed Applicant. (GE 2 at 6) The investigator
asked Applicant about the circumstances surrounding his dismissal from his previous
job. (Tr. 54) Applicant then disclosed them. Later, in response to Government
interrogatories, Applicant stated that he did not tell the first investigator the
circumstances surrounding his departure because he “was not asked, during [his]
interview, why [he] left  . . . ”(GE 2 at 9)
Applicant characterized his interest in pornography as an addiction. (Tr. 38)
Shortly after losing his job, he “made a commitment to honor [his] faith, his wife, [and] to
change, and never hurt her again.” (Tr. 43) In April 2004, he attended an intensive, four-
day, three-night, church-based counseling program dealing with pornography addiction.
(Tr. 40) After the program ended, Applicant continued to attend weekly church-based
workshops regarding this issue for the next three months. (Tr. 39) He then attended a
weekend conference with his wife on strengthening marriage. (Tr. 40)
Applicant has not viewed any pornography since losing his job in 2004. His
current employer knows the circumstances of his departure from his previous job. (Tr.
45) 
Applicant is active in the community, volunteering at food banks and assisting the
elderly with lawn and home maintenance. He also volunteers at a local animal shelter.
(Tr. 81)
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
4
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). 
Applicant viewed pornography on his work-issued laptop computer prompting his
employment dismissal, then failed to disclose the circumstances of his departure from
the job on a 2005 security clearance application and during a 2006 interview with a
security clearance agent. The following disqualifying conditions apply:
AG ¶ 16(a), deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
AG ¶ 16(b), deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative;
and
AG ¶ 16(e), personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as . . .  engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.
Shortly after losing his job in 2004, Applicant participated in intensive counseling
regarding his self-described addiction to pornography. After completing a four-day
session, he continued to attend weekly counseling for the next three months. Applicant
then attended marriage counseling with his wife to repair the marital strain caused by
the revelation of his pornography addiction. His current employer now knows about the
circumstances of his departure from his previous job. Applicant has not viewed
pornography in nearly six years. I conclude the following mitigating conditions under AG
¶ 17 apply to Applicant’s viewing of pornography at work:
5
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s falsifications. Although he
eventually disclosed the circumstances of his departure from his employment, he did
not do so until a second investigative interview three years later. Also, his explanation
for failing to disclose this information during the first interview was not credible.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant deserves credit for overcoming his addiction to pornography. Moreover,
he has, for the most part, enjoyed a distinguished career spanning more than 30 years,
and has held a security clearance for nearly the entire duration. I cannot reconcile this
positive information, however, with the lack of candor that he continued to display when
discussing why he failed to disclose the circumstances surrounding the departure from
his job to the first investigative agent who interviewed him. Upon evaluating this case in
the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the
security concerns.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
