KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant presented no evidence that he has paid or
attempted to resolve any of his debts since 2006.  The Judge also concluded that Applicant’s
failure to pay even the smallest of his debts shows that he is financially overextended.  Adverse
decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 09-03765.a1
DATE: 05/07/2010
DATE: May 7, 2010
In Re:
---------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-03765
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 30, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 26, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
filed for bankruptcy in 1998 because of his financial inexperience and immaturity.  He was 24 years
old at the time, and had purchased a car, acquired a large credit card debt, and lent $8,000 to a friend.
Applicant had no financial problems from 1998 until sometime in 2006, when he and his wife made
a number of financial mistakes.  They bought a large home, took out a $17,000 loan to purchase
home furnishings, and purchased two large vehicles.  Shortly thereafter, Applicant’s wife lost her
job and was not able to find full time employment for the next two years.  Applicant and his wife
currently earn a total of $7,600 per month.  Nevertheless, their earnings are not sufficient to pay day-
to-day living expenses and current debts, even without considering delinquent debts.  Applicant and
his wife currently have $51,576 in delinquent and charged off accounts.  Since 2006, Applicant has
made no effort to contact any of his creditors or to resolve any of his delinquent debts because he
does not have the financial means to do so.  He has promised to make satisfactory payment
arrangements with all his creditors sometime in the future.  However, at the present time, he does
not have the financial means to pay for even the smallest of his delinquent debts.  
The Judge concluded that Applicant presented no evidence to show that he has paid, settled,
or attempted to resolve any of his debts since 2006.  The Judge also concluded that his failure to pay
even the smallest of these debts shows he is financially overextended.  While Applicant established
some circumstances that were beyond his control (his wife’s periods of unemployment), Applicant’s
evidence is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control and he does not have a viable
plan to avoid similar financial problems in the future.  
On appeal, Applicant makes mention of a decision (apparently recent) to file bankruptcy.
This fact is not part of the evidentiary record below.  The Board cannot consider new evidence on
appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Applicant stresses that he was not behind on his debts before his wife lost her job, at which
point he could not support his four children and his wife on one income.  He maintains that he is not
a security risk and that he is on the path of getting his finances in order.  These factors, as well as his
good character and flawless work habits, lead Applicant to assert that the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is wrong.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of1
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s findings of fact regarding his driving record and its
consequences.  The Board notes that the Judge made formal findings favorable to Applicant on all
of the allegations brought under Guideline E, which concerned Applicant’s driving history.
 
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007). 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under Guideline
F and indicated in some detail why mitigating condition ¶ 20(b)  only partially applied and why it1
did not fully mitigate the financial concerns raised in the case.  The Judge also described with
specificity his reasons for not applying the other mitigating conditions listed under Guideline F.  
The Judge’s analysis on these points is supported by the record evidence.   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields     
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
