 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01760
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the Government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is granted.
On January 2, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Investigation
Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance required for his job with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
set of written interrogatories  to clarify or augment information about potentially1
disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing the results of the
background investigation and Applicant’s response to the interrogatories, DOHA
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 Identified in the transcript at pp. 15 - 20.4
2
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
information. On October 9, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for personal conduct (Guideline E) and misuse of3
information technology systems (Guideline M). 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on February 5, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued the same
day, I convened a hearing on February 25, 2010, at which the parties appeared as
scheduled. The Government presented five evidentiary exhibits included in the record
without objection as Gx. 1 - 5. The Government also proffered two documents for
purposes of administrative notice, which were included in the record as Gx. 6 and 7.4
Applicant testified and presented one witness. The record closed on March 8, 2010,
when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submission, which has been admitted without
objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on
March 9, 2010.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged under Guideline M, that, while Applicant was working as
an Information Assurance Officer for a defense contractor at a major military installation
in February 2008, he intentionally deleted the network account of a person working at
that installation. It was further alleged that he did so on two separate occasions and that
he was fired for his actions. (SOR 1.a) Under Guideline E, the Government cross-
alleged the conduct described in SOR 1.a as adverse personal conduct. (SOR 2.a)
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he deleted the account as
alleged, but he denied any malicious intent and denied that he was fired for his conduct.
Applicant averred that he resigned his position and accepted employment with another
company doing business at the same installation. In addition to the admissions of fact
contained in Applicant’s answer, I make the following additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 46 years old. He served in the United States Army, primarily in
infantry assignments, from November 1982 until he retired as a Sergeant First Class
(paygrade E-7) in March 2005. He and his wife have been married since May 1985.
They have three children, ages 18, 17, and 10. Applicant has held a security clearance
for about 30 years. (Gx. 1)
3
One of Applicant’s last active duty assignments in the Army required that he
learn the principles of information assurance and information systems security. In
November 2004, he completed an Army Information Assurance Security Officer
Certification Course. In August 2005, as a civilian, he completed an Army System
Administrator Security Course and a Network Manager Security Course. (Tr. 58 - 59;
Gx. 5)
After retiring, Applicant went to work for a defense contractor as an Information
Security Officer, but left that job in mid-2007 and worked independently doing IT
systems installations and other consulting work. In October 2006, he had been
appointed as an Information Assurance Security Officer (IASO) by the Army Colonel
who was the deputy director of the command where Applicant was working. (Gx. 4) In
December 2007, he was hired by another defense contractor at the same Army
installation he had worked before as an Information Assurance Officer. He managed,
trained, and inspected constituents at that installation. He was also responsible for
ensuring his constituents were properly accredited to use their assigned information
systems. (Tr. 37 - 38) Accordingly, his duties required that he have privileged access to
most aspects of the information systems for which his organization was responsible.
Army Regulation (AR) 380-19 governs Information Systems Security throughout the
Department of the Army (Gx. 7). Information Assurance at Applicant’s job site was
governed by a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) established in November 2006
(Gx. 6). In December 2006, Applicant read and signed a “Network Privileged Access
Agreement and Acknowledgment of Responsibilities” form that detailed specific actions,
both required and prohibited, for his position. (Gx. 5)
On February 6, 2008, Applicant deleted the unclassified user account of a former
co-worker at his previous defense contractor job. Applicant explained that he was
“messing around” (Gx. 3) with the system and did not realize he could actually delete
someone’s account. The person whose account was deleted called the Help Desk and
his account was restored. On February 8, 2008, Applicant again deleted the same
person’s unclassified user account. This time, in response to his Help Desk call, an
investigation was conducted that identified Applicant’s workstation as the source of the
deletion. That same day, Applicant resigned his position in lieu of being fired. (Answer
to SOR; Gx. 2)
When Applicant was asked why he had chosen to delete a particular account, he
explained that the former co-worker occupied the position that Applicant had held eight
months earlier when he worked for that company. That person had been calling
Applicant several times each day about what Applicant felt were mundane issues his
former co-worker should have been able to resolve on his own. Applicant knew what the
job required and could not understand why his former co-worker was bothering him with
such questions. Although the first incident was a lark, Applicant admitted that he had
become somewhat exasperated and the second incident was more of an attempt to
harass the other person. (Tr. 51 - 53) No information, sensitive or otherwise, was lost as
a result of Applicant’s actions. The information system involved was not compromised in
any way by Applicant’s actions, but the user affected was unable to access the system
for a brief period on the two days in question. 
 Directive. 6.3.5
4
After he resigned, Applicant worked two jobs – at a department store and as a
small arms instructor – to support his family. He was hired as an analyst by his current
employer, a defense contractor engaged in logistics support for the Army, in September
2008. 
Applicant’s service in the Army was exemplary. His list of awards and
decorations includes a Meritorious Service Medal, three Army Commendation Medals,
five Army Achievement Medals, seven Army Good Conduct Medals, a Bronze Star, and
a Combat Infantry Badge for deployment to Operation Just Cause in 1989. Applicant
completed virtually every infantry training and combat skills course in the Army, served
as a Drill Sergeant, and is a graduate of the Advanced Noncommissioned Officer
Course. His performance evaluations in the Army were superior, as were his initial
civilian on-the-job evaluations. He and his wife have long been active in their church and
as volunteers for the House of Heroes, a non-profit organization that helps veterans and
public safety personnel, who are disabled, living on a fixed income, or facing other
physical or financial challenges, to renovate or repair their homes. These efforts are
funded entirely from charitable donations and organized by volunteers such as
Applicant and his wife. Applicant enjoys a solid reputation in the community for his
integrity, hard work, and reliability. (Ax. A; Tr. 22 - 27)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
5
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 39 (Guideline M - Use of
Information Technology Systems).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Use of Information Technology Systems
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegation in
SOR ¶ 1.a. Using his privileged system access as an IASO, Applicant intentionally, but
without authorization or other valid reason, deleted a co-worker’s user account on an
unclassified information of a co-worker if proved, would raise a security concern
addressed in AG ¶ 39 as follows: 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related  computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
The facts and circumstances of this case require application of the disqualifying
condition listed at AG ¶ 40(b) (illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction,
6
manipulation or denial of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an
information technology system). Applicant’s actions on two occasions in February 2008
clearly denied a co-worker the use of an unclassified system he needed to do his job.
As to AG ¶ 40(a) (illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology
system or component thereof), this disqualifying condition does not apply because
Applicant’s access was legitimate and consistent with his assigned duties. However, AG
¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system),
applies because he was not authorized to use the system as he did on the occasions at
issue.
The disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 40(c) (use of any information technology
system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to a compartmented area
within the same system); AG ¶ 40(d) (downloading, storing, or transmitting classified
information on or to any unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology
system); AG ¶ 40(g) (negligence or lax security habits in handling information
technology that persist despite counseling by management), and AG ¶ 40(f)
(introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or
from any information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules,
procedures, guidelines or regulations) do not apply based on the facts presented.
Finally, AG ¶ 40(h) (any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or
negligent, that results in damage to the national security) does not apply because it was
not established that any classified information was involved or that the denial of the
user’s access to his account had any impact on national security. 
Applicant has acknowledged the gravity of his conduct, and the record clearly
shows that he violated a position of trust, and that he had no valid reason for doing what
he did. Accordingly, AG ¶ 41(b) (the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of
organizational efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily available) does not
apply. The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 41(c) (the conduct was unintentional or
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and
by notification of supervisor) does not apply because his conduct was deliberate and he
did not act to correct it before he was confronted by his supervisors. 
By contrast, the record as a whole supports the mitigating condition at AG ¶
41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). This isolated event occurred
more than two years ago. In light of all of the available information about Applicant’s
military career and his civilian job performance, his conduct in this regard was an
aberration. Further, he no longer works as an IASO and is unlikely to seek such a
position in the future. On balance, I conclude that available information is sufficient to
mitigate the security concerns raised by Applicant’s misuse of the information
technology system in question. 
7
Personal Conduct
The Government also alleged that Applicant’s misuse of technology is
disqualifying as adverse personal conduct under Guideline E. (SOR 2.a) This security
concern is expressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
These facts raise the potential applicability of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶
16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information); AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that
is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for
an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of...(4) evidence of
significant misuse of government or other employer's time or resources); and AG ¶ 16(f)
(violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer
as a condition of employment). 
As to AG ¶ 16(f), Applicant signed an agreement to not misuse his position as an
IASO with privileged access. He also acknowledged his responsibilities to protect the
systems and information to which he had been entrusted. His conduct violated that
agreement. As to AG ¶ 16(c), as discussed under Guideline M, above, the information
was not sufficient for an adverse determination; however, this disqualifying condition
does not apply because of a favorable whole-person analysis, below. Finally, although
Applicant misused government resources by deleting a co-worker’s account, his
conduct is specifically addressed under Guideline M. Accordingly, AG ¶ 16(d) does not
apply. The remaining disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are inapposite to the facts
and circumstances of this case.
Available information further requires application of the mitigating condition at AG
¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment). For the same reasons discussed under the Guideline M mitigating condition
at AG  ¶ 41(a), application of AG ¶ 17(c) is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns
about Applicant’s personal conduct. 
8
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and M. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 46 years
old, married for 25 years, and the father of three. He is also a distinguished veteran of
the U.S. Army, who served for 23 years before retiring in 2005. He has held a security
clearance through the military and as a civilian for almost 30 years. His reputation for
honesty, hard work, integrity, and reliability is significant. He has acknowledged his
wrongdoing in this matter, and he has paid a high professional and personal price for
his actions. His resignation in February 2008 resulted in several months of under-
employment before he was hired for his current job later that year. Evaluations of his
military and civilian job performance have been excellent. All of the information bearing
on Applicant’s character, judgment, honesty, and reliability indicates that Applicant’s
continued access to classified information does not present an unacceptable risk to the
Government despite the adverse information in his background. A fair and
commonsense evaluation of this record shows that the security concerns raised by
Applicant’s conduct relative to information technology systems and personal conduct
are mitigated. Any doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified
information have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
