                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02694 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Franciso Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline K, 
Handling Protected Information, Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems, 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
On October 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines K, M, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 10, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 23, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on April 13, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
He did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 
2010.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, by deleting the date 
December 2005 and inserting the date October 2006. Applicant had no objection and 
agreed to proceed with the hearing. The motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He graduated from high school in 1996 and attended 
college after high school, but did not earn a degree. He is presently taking college 
courses to complete his degree. He married in 2000 and divorced in 2002. He remarried 
in 2004, and he and his wife have two children, ages three and two. He works in the 
information technology field for a federal contractor.1  
 
Applicant enlisted in the Army in 2000 and was honorably discharged in October 
2006. While serving in the Army, he initially held a Secret security clearance and later it 
was upgraded to a Top Secret security clearance with access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). Due to the nature of Applicant’s job in the Army, all 
documents at the facility where he worked were required to be stamped “secret.” 
Sometime in 2004, Applicant was on medical leave for approximately six weeks. He 
brought work home so he could stay current on his duties. While at work, he stamped a 
document “secret” as required by the command’s protocol. He took the document home. 
In October 2006, while on terminal leave pending his discharge, he found the document. 
He believed it did not contained material that should have been classified information 
and he shredded it at his home. He did not inform anyone in the Army that he took the 
document home or that he shredded it. Later that same month he was interviewing for a 
new job. He was required to take a polygraph. During the interview prior to the 
polygraph, he revealed to the investigator that he had shredded the document and 
provided the above explanation for his actions. Applicant fully understood that he should 
have reported that he had the document and should not have shredded it. The 
document was not properly stored at his home. There is no evidence any information 
was compromised.2  
 
Applicant was to return a week after his polygraph interview for a follow-up 
polygraph. While at home, he searched his memory to recall if he had violated any other 
1 Tr. 51-60, 78-82. 
 
2 Tr. 19-28, 51, 84-87. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
security rules. When he returned a week later to be polygraphed a second time, he 
disclosed that on one occasion he made a copy of a classified document on a non-
secure printer. He took responsibility for his actions. The reason for his actions was 
because the secure printer was broken and the command was busy preparing for a 
high-level official. He was in a hurry and took the action for expediency. He did not 
report his action until the polygraph.3  
 
Applicant admitted that in 2006, while on duty, he had authorized access to 
government computers. He was required to access certain files as part of his duties. 
While he was performing his duties, he noticed that a personal file that he had 
authorized access to had a file named “resume.” He was not authorized to open the 
personal resume file, but he did and made a copy of the resume to use as an example 
for his own resume. He then did a search to see if any other personal files might have 
resumes. He located a couple and made copies. His intention was not to gain personal 
information, but rather to use the others’ resumes to assist in creating his own. He knew 
he should not have accessed coworkers’ resumes.4  
 
Applicant admitted while he was on duty one night, he swapped a CD drive on a 
classified SIPR computer with a DVD drive and downloaded unauthorized software. His 
intention was to watch a movie on the computer. His supervisor observed him and 
asked what he was doing and he was told to stop. He did as he was told and deleted 
the software from the SIPR computer and returned the CD drive. No other action was 
taken.5  
 
Applicant learned sometime in 2007 that his security clearance was revoked by 
another Government agency. This occurred after he disclosed the above information in 
conjunction with his polygraph examination. He was not aware of which agency it was, 
but confirmed he was advised of the revocation.6  
 
Applicant went to nonjudicial punishment on two occasions while serving in the 
Army. The first one occurred in 2001, when he was still in training and in a restricted 
environment. He was “absent without official leave” for approximately 24 hours. His wife 
came to his duty station and they had an argument. He was reduced in grade, and was 
awarded restriction, and extra duties. In 2005, he went to nonjudicial punishment for 
“neglect of duty.” Applicant acknowledged he pleaded guilty to the offense. He was 
required to follow up on an inventory and did not. He stated he was not aware that he 
was required to follow up on the inventory, but decided not to contest the allegation. He 
was reduced in grade and received extra duties.7  
3 Tr. 28-30, 61, 89. 
 
4 Tr. 30-34, 62-67. 
 
5 Tr. 34-37, 67-71. 
 
6 Tr. 37-38, 76. 
 
7 Tr. 38-47, 72-76. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant took full responsibility for his actions and did not offer excuses. He 
worked in an environment that was in constant contact with classified information. He 
worked in a secure building that required special access for those entering. He 
explained that the environment he was in had become lax about security rules. He 
understands the serious ramifications of his lax conduct. He stated that after serious 
reflection about his actions, he truly grasps the magnitude and the negative implications 
of the number of infractions he committed. He understands that although he was 
committed to security awareness, he made personal compromises for convenience. He 
understood that the only assurance he could provide that he would not repeat his 
actions was his solemn promise. He stated that if he is trusted again with a security 
clearance he would not betray that trust. I found Applicant sincere and credible.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
8 Tr. 48-50, 88-91. 
 
5 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Appellant brought home a document classified “secret.” He stored it at his 
residence for approximately two years and then destroyed it without reporting his 
actions. He made a copy of a classified document on an unclassified copy machine. I 
find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35, and I have 
especially considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual currently reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant admittedly became lax in following security procedures. He intentionally 
brought home a document that was marked secret. Applicant disobeyed the rules. Later 
when he found the document, he shredded it, and again did not follow the rules. He 
made a copy of a classified document on an unclassified copy machine for expediency. 
Applicant was in a secure environment where he dealt with classified documents 
regularly. He has had four and a half years to reflect on his conduct. He has matured 
and has a renewed appreciation for the seriousness of protecting classified information. 
He made mistakes and understands the importance of following all rules all the time. I 
do not believe Applicant will repeat his conduct. I am convinced he will be diligent in 
safeguarding classified information. I believe his lapse in judgment during this period of 
time is not indicative of his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I find 
Applicant has a positive attitude toward discharging his security responsibilities. 
Therefore, I find mitigating conditions AG ¶ 35(a) and ¶ 35(b) apply.   
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have especially considered the following: 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant was authorized to view personal files that pertained to his duties. 
However, he was not authorized to view personal files for his personal use, which he 
did. Applicant replaced a CD drive with a DVD drive, and loaded software on a SIPR 
computer, so he could watch a movie. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and especially 
considered the following:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
The same analysis as discussed above under Guideline K, applies to this 
guideline. There is no question Applicant’s actions were wrong. He readily 
acknowledges he used poor judgment. It has been four years since he committed these 
violations. Applicant has matured and has a more responsible attitude towards the 
seriousness of complying with security rules. I find the above mitigating condition 
applies. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have especially considered the following: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant failed to properly report that he transported to and stored at his home a 
classified document and later destroyed it. He also failed to report he made a copy of a 
classified document on an unclassified computer. His security clearance was revoked in 
2007 due to the security infractions and violations he committed. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially 
considered the following: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
The analysis under Guideline K, Handing Protected Information, and Guideline 
M, Use of Information Technology Systems is the same for Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Applicant appreciates the seriousness of his conduct. He admits that he took 
shortcuts and became lax in following all of the security rules. It has been approximately 
four years since his conduct occurred. He does not take lightly what he did. I considered 
Applicant’s statements, demeanor, and honesty in answering all of my questions. He 
demonstrated a mature and responsible attitude toward his conduct. He is committed to 
being scrupulously responsible. When asked what assurances he could give me that he 
would not exhibit similar behavior in the future, he candidly stated that all he could do 
was promise that if he was trusted again he would not betray the privilege. I found 
Applicant credible and sincere. I have considered the period of time since his last 
violation, his attitude, maturity, and renewed commitment to complying with all rules. I 
find Applicant’s behavior is unlikely to recur and he has taken positive steps to ensure 
he does not become complacent. Therefore, I find the above mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K, M, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was young and immature when he committed security infractions and failed to 
comply with procedures. He understands the seriousness of his lax attitude. He has 
matured and acknowledged his actions. He did not make excuses and was honest 
when answering all of my questions. I do not believe Applicant is a security risk. I 
believe due to his youth and the office atmosphere he became complacent. I believe he 
will be diligent and is committed to complying with all regulations and procedures in the 
future. Overall the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
Handling Protected Information, Use of Information Technology Systems, and Personal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
