 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04370 
                                                            )                                         
                                                            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on April 16, 2009. On January 29, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
 On February 17, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 
12, 2010. Applicant, Department Counsel, and I agreed to a hearing date of April 19, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 25, 2010, and I convened Applicant’s 
hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced nine exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 9 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and called two witnesses. She introduced seven exhibits, which were 
marked as Ex. A through Ex. G and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on April 27, 2010.    
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶ 1.a.) In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
allegation.  Applicant’s admission is included as a finding of fact. 
 
 Applicant seeks a security clearance as an employee of a government 
contractor. She is 33 years old, single, and has no children. She has been employed full 
time for the past five years.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 41-43.) 
 
 When she was in high school, Applicant had part-time jobs, and she filed federal 
tax returns on her earnings as an hourly employee. When she reached 18, and after 
graduating from high school, Applicant acquired her own apartment and worked as a 
waitress and bartender. She filed federal tax returns on her wages and tips. (Tr. 64-66.) 
 
 In the late 1990s, Applicant met a man and entered a spouse-like relationship 
with him which lasted about seven years. During that time, she worked part-time as a 
waitress but was primarily supported by her partner. In 2005, when the relationship 
ended, she moved to a major metropolitan area and again sought work as a waitress 
and bartender. In the metropolitan area, she was able to earn over $60,000 a year in 
tips. In 2005, she purchased a 2003 Cadillac CTS, with monthly payments of $519.1 (Tr. 
59-66.) 
 
 Applicant explained that as a restaurant worker, waitress, and bartender, her 
salary was minimal. She received most of her income from tips, which her employers 
reported to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Applicant knew it was her responsibility 
to pay federal income taxes on her income from tips. (Tr. 63-66.) 
 
 Applicant also became a licensed real estate agent and worked for a real estate 
company. She received commissions for the real estate sales she made, and she knew 
she was responsible for paying federal and state income taxes on her real estate 
commissions. (Ex. 1; Tr. 65-70.) 
 
 
1 Applicant’s credit reports show that the purchase price of the automobile was $23,086. (Ex. 8 at 2; Ex. 9 
at 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 During tax years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008, Applicant failed to 
timely file and pay federal income taxes on her tip and real estate commission incomes.  
She provided no evidence that she had requested filing extensions between 2003 and 
2008. She stated that there was no situation beyond her control that caused her to fail 
to pay her federal income taxes for the years 2003 through 2008. She filed her 2005 
federal income tax return in May 2006. In 2007, the IRS confiscated $1,600 from her 
checking account to satisfy a tax delinquency. In January 2008, she filed her 2003 
federal income tax return. She filed her 2004, 2006, and 2007 federal income tax 
returns in February 2008.2 The IRS informed Applicant that, as of December 16, 2009, 
she owed $36,133.23 in unpaid taxes, interest, and penalties. The IRS also informed 
Applicant that it would continue to charge penalties and interest until she paid the 
amount she owed in full. (Ex. 4; Ex. 5 at 3; Ex. E; Tr. 44-49.) 
    
 In April 2009, after beginning her work as an employee of a federal contractor, 
Applicant contacted the IRS to discuss her delinquent tax debt. The IRS determined that 
Applicant has insufficient income to pay the total balance due or to make installment 
payments. Therefore, the IRS has advised Applicant to make payments as she is able. 
Applicant provided documentation to establish that she made three payments of $100 to 
the IRS on the $36,133 debt in January, February, and March 2010. She plans to 
increase her payments in six months, after she has paid off her car note. (Ex. E; Ex. F; 
Ex. 5; Tr. 54-59.) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual income from her job as a federal contractor is   
$40,456. Her gross monthly income is $3,024. She shares living expenses with a friend, 
and she identifies her monthly living expenses as follows: food, clothing, miscellaneous: 
$340; housing and utilities: $950; vehicle ownership costs: $519.67; vehicle operating 
costs: $400; public transportation: $10; health insurance: $49.30; cell phone: $150; 
taxes: $366.04; and IRS debt payment: $100. She provided documentation to 
corroborate her statement that she had filed and presented payment to satisfy her 2009 
federal income tax obligation. (Ex. D; Ex. G; Tr. 35-36, 61.) 
 
 In addition to her work as a federal contractor, Applicant continues to work as a 
waitress and bartender two to three nights a month. She estimates that she earns 
between $100 and $300 a month from this work. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor appeared as a witness on her behalf. He praised 
Applicant’s dependability and reliability and stated that, in his opinion, she is an 
excellent employee. Applicant’s girlhood friend, with whom she shares a house, also 
testified on her behalf. The friend stated that Applicant pays her rent on time each 
month.  (Tr. 73-74, 81-82.) 
 
 Applicant has sought assistance from tax preparers, but she has not had 
consumer credit counseling regarding her tax debt to the IRS. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
2 Applicant acknowledged that she failed to timely file and pay her 2008 federal income tax, but she did 
not specify when she filed her 2008 tax return. (Tr. 46.)  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.  Additionally, under AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns as required . . .” can raise a security concern that may be 
disqualifying. 
 
For several years, Applicant received tip and commission income. Since she had 
worked as a waitress for many years, she was familiar with the requirements for 
reporting and paying taxes on tip income. As a real estate agent, she was also familiar 
with her obligation to pay taxes on income earned through commissions. No 
circumstances beyond her control prevented her from filing her federal tax returns and 
paying the taxes required of her. However, she elected not to report and pay the taxes.  
This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s tax delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
 
6 
 
 
apply. If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might be applicable. Moreover, if “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might 
apply. Additionally, if “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply. Finally, if “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might 
apply. 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s tax delinquencies began several years ago 
and continue to this day. Applicant’s current federal tax delinquencies involve 
substantial sums of money in proportion to her income and resources, occurred under 
circumstances that are likely to continue, and cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The record does not include facts that suggest protracted conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control that would explain her failure over a period of years to meet her 
federal tax obligations. She has been employed full time for the past five years, and she 
has not experienced personal or financial hardship. While she has not enrolled in 
consumer credit counseling, she has, to her credit, filed her delinquent federal income 
tax returns and worked cooperatively with the IRS to address her considerable tax 
indebtedness. It would appear that Applicant’s current payments of $100 a month will 
not reduce her debt, which continues to grow in response to interest and penalties 
imposed upon the principal debt. While Applicant’s intention to satisfy her delinquent 
federal tax debt is laudable, she has failed to demonstrate a track record of financial 
responsibility. She has not yet demonstrated that she can repay her $36,000 federal tax 
debt and avoid financial delinquencies in the future. I conclude AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 
20(c) are not applicable. I also conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part and that AG ¶ 
20(e) is not raised by the facts in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s supervisor and 
her girlhood friend respect and appreciate her dependability. Her supervisor judges her 
to be an excellent employee.  
 
However, Applicant failed to file her federal income tax returns for six years, from 
2003 until 2008. Her failure to so do was not based on ignorance: she was fully aware 
of her responsibility to pay federal income taxes on tips and commissions. She elected 
not to follow established rules for paying her taxes and, instead, used her income for 
other purposes. 
 
A security clearance applicant’s failure to file tax returns can suggest that he or 
she has a problem in complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
It is well established that “[v]oluntary compliance with such rules and systems is 
essential for protecting classified information.” See ISCR Case No. 97-0744 (November 
6, 1998) at 3.   
 
Applicant’s failure to pay her federal taxes began when she was a mature adult, 
and she failed to address her tax obligations for a significant period of time, a decision 
that raises concerns about her judgment and reliability. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her tax delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                         Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                       Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
