 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07001 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 12, 2010, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on March 9, 2010. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received a copy of the FORM on March 16, 2010. He 
 
2 
 
answered the FORM in an undated response. He did not object to the admission of the 
items attached to the FORM, and they are admitted. Department Counsel did not object 
to the documents in Applicant’s response, and they are admitted. The case was 
assigned to me on April 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the United States Army from 1999 until he was honorably discharged in May 
2008. Applicant is a high school graduate. He married in 2001 and divorced in 2007. He 
married again in 2007. He and his current wife have a five-year-old child.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $53,000. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in SOR except the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.l ($337) and 1.p ($473), which he denied. The debts he admitted range from $141 
(SOR ¶ 1.n) to $14,369 owed to a state’s Attorney General for unpaid child support 
(SOR ¶ 1.c).  
 
 Applicant was unemployed for a period after he was discharged from active duty. 
Many of his delinquent debts were accrued before his discharge. The $5,733 debt to an 
apartment landlord alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was incurred in about 2006 to 2007. Applicant 
was living in the barracks but wanted to live off-post. He rented an apartment. He 
moved back in the barracks shortly thereafter. He asked his first wife to terminate the 
lease and thought the matter had ended. He later learned that she did not end the 
lease. Applicant was questioned by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in June 2009. He told the investigator that he was paying $400 per 
month to this creditor. No documentary evidence was submitted to support this claim.2 
 
 Applicant stated that he and his first wife separated a short time after their 
wedding. His child support liability to his ex-wife is for a child born in 2003, while they 
were married. Applicant did not believe he was the father, because she became 
pregnant while he was deployed. She later admitted to him that he was not the child’s 
father. The court ordered Applicant to pay $879 per month in child support. Applicant 
told the OPM investigator in June 2009 that he was paying $200 per month, which was 
all that he could afford. He stated that he intended to dispute his paternity, but he did 
not have the money to contest the matter in court. Applicant admitted owing child 
support arrearages of $14,369 (SOR ¶ 1.c). He did not submit documentary evidence of 
any payments.3   
 
 Three of the debts alleged in the SOR are for deficiencies owed on car loans 
after the vehicles were repossessed (SOR ¶¶ 1.h - $4,315, 1.k - $8,859, and 1.q - 
$11,000). Applicant told the OPM investigator that he financed the car that led to the 
                                                          
1 Item 5.  
 
2 Items 5, 6.  
 
3 Items 4, 6.  
 
3 
 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.q for his first wife in about 2005. He stated that he made allotments 
from his military pay to a bank for her to use to pay the car loan. She withdrew the 
money each month but did not pay the loan. He stated he stopped the allotment in 
2007, because she told him she was going to refinance the loan. It appears that one of 
the debts for car repossessions may be a duplicate. I will consider that Applicant only 
owes two of the debts.4   
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent $337 debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a telephone services provider. This debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. Applicant 
stated that he never had an account with the telephone services company. This debt is 
listed on a credit report obtained in April 2009. It is not listed on the credit report 
obtained in January 2010.5   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p alleges a delinquent debt of $473. Applicant denied owing this debt, 
stating he did not recognize the creditor. This debt is listed on the April 2009 credit 
report, but it is not listed on the January 2010 credit report. 6 
 
 Applicant contracted with a law firm on April 6, 2010, to assist in resolving his 
debts. He enrolled seven debts, totaling $23,961, in the company’s debt settlement 
program (DSP). The company charged an initial fee of $300. Applicant agreed to place 
$395 each month into an account to be used to settle his debts. There is a $50 per 
month administration fee, which will be debited out of the settlement account. The 
company agrees to negotiate settlements with his creditors and pay the settlement out 
of the settlement account. The company will receive an additional contingency fee of 
30% of the difference between the creditor’s claim and the amount the creditor agrees 
to accept as settlement of the debt. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 
1.j, and 1.k were included in the DSP. The first $395 monthly payment was due to be 
paid on April 17, 2010, which was after Applicant submitted his response to the FORM.7   
 
 The law firm and Applicant prepared a personal financial summary (PFS). It listed 
his assets, liabilities, monthly income, and monthly expenses. The PFS listed his 
monthly income at $3,600 and his monthly expenses, without taking into account his 
child support and payment on his delinquent debts, at $3,165. That leaves $435 to be 
used to pay the law firm the $395 monthly payments and any other expenses. The 
Applicant did not submit evidence of payments of his other debts, nor did he state how 
he planned on addressing the other debts, including his ongoing child support 
obligation. 8   
 
 
                                                          
4 Items 4-8.  
 
5 Id.  
 
6 Id.  
 
7 Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
8 Id.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved most of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed after he was discharged from the Army. However, he 
had financial problems before his discharge. He also placed some blame on his first 
wife. Some of his financial problems may have resulted from conditions that were 
outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has made little effort to pay his 
debts except for enrolling in a debt settlement program with a law firm after he received 
the FORM. Applicant’s debt settlement program does not contain all his delinquent 
debts and does not account for his child support obligations. Even if Applicant diligently 
pays the law firm each month, his child support arrearages will increase each month 
and his other debts will go unpaid. He did not present any plan on how he will address 
his child support and his other delinquent debts. I am unable to make a determination 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant may have received some financial counseling from the law firm that is 
assisting with his debt settlement program. There is insufficient information in the record 
for a finding that there are clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant denied owing two debts alleged in the SOR. Neither debt is listed on 
the most recent credit report in evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.p. I am also giving Applicant credit that one of the three debts for 
repossessed cars may be a duplicate. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.q.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s honorable service in the United States Army. He has made a recent effort to 
address some of his delinquent debts through a law firm’s debt settlement program. 
However, the debt settlement program does not include all his delinquent debts or his 
child support obligations. Even if Applicant conscientiously pays the monthly $395 
payment to the law firm, a number of delinquent debts will go unaddressed and his child 
support arrearages will continue to increase.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.o:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
