                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04094 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant lacks a track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
July 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
On August 29, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on November 9, 2009. Because of scheduling concerns, it was 
reassigned to me on November 20, 2009. DOHA issued the first notice of hearing on 
November 17, 2009, convening a hearing on December 21, 2009. Because of inclement 
weather, the hearing was postponed. The second notice of hearing was issued on 
January 5, 2010, convening a hearing on January 29, 2010. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. All GEs 
were admitted. GE 4 – 7 were admitted over Applicant’s relevance objections – that he 
had paid the judgments reflected on the documents. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. AE 3 was 
received post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d–1.s. He denied the allegations 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.c. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor 
and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior archives technician employed by a defense 
contractor. He served in the U.S. Navy from September 1989 until May 1996. His 
service was characterized as honorable. At the time of his discharge, he held the grade 
of E-4. He was trained as a telecommunications specialist, and he possessed a top 
secret clearance. Three months after his honorable discharge, he started working for a 
government contractor. His access to classified information was continued at the same 
level.  
 
Applicant married his wife in June 1997. They have no children. His wife has a 
part-time job, and she contributes financially to the household. Her take-home pay is 
approximately $500 a month. She has had medical problems and some of the 
delinquent medical debts are for medical services she received. Applicant completed an 
associate’s degree in computer electronic engineering in September 2005, which he 
financed through student loans. 
 
Applicant has been consistently employed by a government contractor since April 
2001. He attributed his current financial problems to not having a consistent full-time job 
after his discharge from the Navy, being underemployed, having to pay two car notes in 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
2005,1 and having to start making payments on his student loans after graduating in 
September 2005. Also, in 2001 his employer lost his government contract and Applicant 
was hired by the incoming contractor, but at a lower salary. For four months he received 
less pay than what he was making with his prior employer and that contributed to his 
financial problems. Since 2001, he has held both a full-time job and part-time jobs to 
meet his financial obligations.  
 
Applicant worked part-time jobs for government contractors from July 2007 until 
November 2007, and from March 2009 to present. Although he has worked part-time 
jobs, his income has been limited due to the number of hours he has been allowed to 
work. He also requires access to classified information for his part-time jobs.  
 
Applicant’s personal financial summary shows he and his wife make 
approximately $3,700 in combined monthly income. They have $3,386 in monthly 
expenses and $314 of disposable income. As of February 2010, he had approximately 
$93,800 in debts, including $10,300 in unsecured debts, $11,486 in auto loans, and 
$71,900 in student loans (AE 3). 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c alleged three unpaid judgments for his failure to pay rent. He 
presented receipts (AE 3) and a January 2010 signed lease agreement that show the 
judgments have been satisfied. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleged a $1,241 medical bill for his wife, which has been delinquent 
since December 2006. He presented no evidence of efforts to settle, pay, or otherwise 
resolve this debt since acquired. Applicant is disputing the state tax lien alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.e for $1,017, claiming he was not living in that state during the tax year in question. 
AE 3 shows he paid taxes in another state for the year in question. Although he may 
have a reasonable basis to dispute this debt, he has yet to provide a copy of the 
document showing he disputed the debt.   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.l, 1.r, and 1.s alleged unresolved debts to telephone service 
providers, defaulted credit card accounts, unpaid medical services, a repossessed car, 
and unpaid car insurance, many of which have been delinquent for many years. He 
claimed he is disputing some debts, denies knowledge of other creditors, claimed he 
made telephone contact with some collectors, and claimed he made two payments 
towards his repossessed car debt. Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to 
support his claims of disputes, contacts with creditors, payments, or any other efforts to 
resolve these debts. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.m-1.q alleged approximately $72,000 in delinquent student loans. He 
defaulted on the loans in 2005, and claimed he started making some payments in July 
2009. He failed to present documentary evidence to show he has made any payments 
on the student loans since he acquired them. 
 
1 Applicant bought a new car in June 2002, which was totaled in a 2009 car accident. He also bought a 
new car in May 2003 which was repossessed in February 2009 (Tr. 92, 99). 
 
4 
 
 
 
Based on Applicant’s credit reports, his testimony, and his statements, I find that 
Applicant is responsible for all the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, except SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.c and 1.e. His liabilities total approximately $72,000. These debts are not 
resolved. 
 
In February 2010, Applicant hired the services of a debt management company 
to assist him to establish a budget and to pay his debts. He presented no evidence of 
any prior financial counseling, participation in consumer debt consolidation programs, of 
that he was following a budget prior to February 2010.  
 
Applicant was forthcoming about his past and present financial situation. He 
highlighted his military service, his good performance for government contractors, that 
he is considered a valued employee, and his many years possessing a security 
clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems and averred he has 
always intended to pay his delinquent debts. He promised to make satisfactory payment 
arrangements with all of his creditors sometime in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”2 Once the 
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts. Applicant and his spouse are responsible 
for 15 of the alleged delinquent debs, many of which have been delinquent since 2003. 
Their total liability is approximately $72,000 in unresolved debt.  
 
Applicant presented little documentary evidence to show that he has paid, 
settled, or attempted to resolve any of the alleged debts since he acquired the debs. AG 
 
2 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not 
meeting financial obligations, apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed 
to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., not having a consistent full-time job after his 
discharge from the Navy, underemployment, and diminished income resulting from his 
change in employers. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the 
financial concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.  
 
 The evidence shows Applicant and his wife were living beyond their financial 
means when they purchased two cars and acquired significant student loan debt. He 
presented little evidence of debt payments, contacts with creditors, or negotiations to 
resolve his SOR debts. Considering the evidence as a whole, his financial problems are 
not under control. Applicant receives credit for contracting the services of a debt 
management company to assist him with resolution of his debts. However, it is too soon 
to determine whether he has a viable plan to resolve his financial predicament or that he 
will be able to avoid similar financial problems in the future. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), (e), and (f) do not apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are not yet under control, and until February 2010 he did not participate in 
financial counseling. He also failed to show he made good-faith efforts to resolve his 
debts. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility by taking 
sufficient action to resolve his debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature man and a good 
worker. He served in the Navy and continues his service to the United States through 
his many years of good work for government contractors. He possessed a security 
clearance for approximately 20 years. There is no evidence he has ever compromised 
or caused others to compromise classified information. These factors show some 
responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. Applicant also established some 
circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to pay his debts.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His financial problems are due primarily to his 
living beyond his financial means. Except for the three paid judgments, he presented 
little documentary evidence of debt payments, contacts with creditors, or negotiations of 
debts. His favorable information fails to show financial responsibility and good judgment. 
He has made little effort to resolve his financial obligations. His financial problems are 
 
8 
 
 
not under control. It is too soon to determine whether he has established a viable 
financial plan to resolve his current problems and whether he has learned to avoid 
similar financial problems in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, 1.e:    For Applicant 
  
Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.f-1.s:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
