 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-04004 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the financial concerns, but has not mitigated the security 
concerns related to foreign influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on March 25, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On December 23, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed 
and notarized on January 4, 2010, Applicant admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
B, and denied the two allegations under Guideline F. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on March 3, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on March 7, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 25, 2010, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on April 20, 2010. The Government offered five exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered five exhibits, admitted without objection as Applicant's Exhibits (AE) A through E. 
I held the record open at Applicant's request to allow him to submit additional 
documentation. He timely submitted two documents, which were forwarded to me 
without objection by Department Counsel. I admitted the documents as AE F and G. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 29, 2010. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan). The facts are summarized 
at pages 1 through 7 of the request, and supported by eight documents pertaining to 
Pakistan (Hearing Exhibit 1). The documents are included to provide elaboration and 
context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. 
Government reports in Hearing Exhibit 1. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 32 years old, submitted an application in 2009 to request a security 
clearance as part of his job as a security officer for a defense contractor. Since June 
2006, he has also worked in a retail optical shop. He came to the United States at the 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
age of 15. He completed high school in 1998 and became a U.S. citizen in 2000. (GE 1; 
Tr. 42) 
 
He was born in Pakistan. Applicant's deceased father worked for the U.S. 
Government at the American Embassy in Pakistan for 25 years as a driver and 
maintenance worker. When he retired, he was offered a visa to the United States for 
himself and his family. In 1993, he brought Applicant to the United States. He brought 
two of Applicant's brothers to the United States in the mid-1990s; they are now U.S. 
citizens. The remaining brother, with his wife and five children, came to the United States 
in 2006. He is not a U.S. citizen. Applicant's father died in 2005. (Tr. 24-28) 
 
Applicant's mother, a citizen and resident of Pakistan, is a homemaker. He hopes 
to have her come to the United States to visit and to see his two-year-old son. He speaks 
with her by telephone about twice per month, and sends her about $100 “every couple of 
months.” He testified that she is surviving on the money the family sends her. He plans 
to sponsor her immigration to the United States in the future. However, his income does 
not meet the required level, so he is planning to work with his brothers to reach the 
necessary income to qualify. (GE 3; Tr. 38, 66-69) He is concerned about her safety in 
Pakistan. When asked about the plans to bring her to the United States, he testified that 
he has discussed the process with an attorney, “…because, honestly, back home, things 
are not going good right now. So I don’t feel safe to have my mother over there.” (Tr. 67) 
He said there is no unrest in her location, but he was concerned for her safety because, 
 
Well, every time we see on news and everything, so a lot of people 
are scared to get out. You -- you get this news, suicide bomb or this 
going on and that, politics and, you know. (Tr. 68)  
 
His three sisters, their husbands, and their children are also resident citizens of 
Pakistan. Applicant has nine nieces and nephews from his sisters’ families. He has a 
good relationship with his sisters. He occasionally speaks them during calls to his mother 
in Pakistan. Applicant married in Pakistan in 2003. His wife, a homemaker, came to the 
United States in 2005, and resides with Applicant. She is a Pakistani citizen and a U.S. 
permanent resident. Her parents, two brothers, and three sisters live in Pakistan. Her 
father is a retired court clerk. (Tr. 30-32) Applicant's security clearance application lists 
one two-year-old son, who is a U.S. citizen by birth. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 28-30, 35-37)  
 
Applicant has one older brother who is a resident and citizen of Pakistan. He also 
has three brothers, 29, 42, and 47 years old, who reside with him. Two are employed in 
retail businesses, and one is a maintenance worker. Two of his brothers are U.S. 
citizens. One of them has a wife and family who still reside in Pakistan. Applicant's other 
brother is a permanent resident. He worked for many years as an air-conditioning 
technician in the American embassy in Pakistan. He was given a visa to bring his family 
to the United States and they now live with Applicant. The family members living together 
in the same house with Applicant total 14. If Applicant brings his mother to the United 
States, she will also live with him. (GE 1; Tr. 33-35, 37-38, 57) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant does not have bank accounts, real property, or other financial interests 
in Pakistan. He testified that if his mother passes away, her real property is likely to pass 
to her oldest son rather than Applicant. His family is aware that he is applying for a 
security clearance. Applicant traveled to Pakistan for four months in 2000, for two 
months in 2003 for his marriage, and for three months in 2004. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 55, 66) 
 
 In February 2006, when he was 28 years old, Applicant purchased a house for 
approximately $530,000, with a down payment of approximately $25,000. He obtained a 
first mortgage of $416,000 and a second mortgage of approximately $115,000. The 
monthly payment was approximately $3,500. In 2005 and 2006, Applicant was working 
in a retail sales position with hourly pay plus commissions, and also as a bank teller at 
an hourly wage. His annual salary for each year was approximately $35,000 to $37,000. 
In about March 2006, Applicant lost both jobs. He was unemployed, doing only odd 
jobs, for about three months. He then obtained a retail position in June 2006, paying 
about $35,000 annually. At first, Applicant's brothers, who were living with him, helped 
pay about half of the mortgage payments. Later, their financial support decreased. At 
about the same time, his brother was looking for a house. His three brothers purchased 
another house together. Applicant now lives with them in that house. (Tr. 39-45, 53-54, 
60) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant's mortgage payments started to become delinquent. When he 
was unemployed, he stopped making payments. He did not resume payments for 
several months because his realtor advised him to stop and let the house go into 
foreclosure. Other than talking with his realtor, Applicant has not participated in any 
financial counseling. He failed to make payments for about seven months. By 
November 2009, he was $30,000 delinquent on the first mortgage and about $7,500 
delinquent on the second mortgage. Applicant was concerned about foreclosure, and 
talked with his realtor about selling the house. In November 2009, the house sold at a 
short sale for approximately $425,000. The first mortgage was paid in full, and Applicant 
was not responsible for a deficiency. However, the company holding the smaller loan 
would accept the short sale only if Applicant agreed to pay $5,000 in 24 monthly 
payments of $208.34. Applicant provided documentation showing his payments since 
November 2009. (AE A, B, C, E, F; Tr. 45-52) 
 
 Applicant's earnings statement, dated April 20, 2010, shows that he earned gross 
wages, during that two-week period, of $1,325. After taxes and deductions, his net 
biweekly pay was $1,189, or net monthly wages of approximately $2,378. His monthly 
expenses include $800 rent, $200 auto expenses, $100 for a cell phone, $600 in food 
and child expenses, $55 for cable/internet, and $208.45 for his monthly mortgage 
deficiency payment. After deducting his total monthly expenses of $1,964, he has a 
monthly net remainder of $414. Other than the mortgage loans discussed previously, 
Applicant's 2009 credit reports show no delinquencies. (GE 4, 5; AE G) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a co-worker, who is a doctor of 
optometry at the retail shop. She has known Applicant since 2007, and describes him 
as hard-working, dependable, and conscientious. She considers him to be a good 
citizen, who is trustworthy and upstanding. (AE D) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan)  
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It is a low-income 
country, with a population that is 97 percent Muslim. It has a coalition government led 
by Prime Minister Yousef Gilani and President Asif Ali Zardari, widower of assassinated 
Pakistan People’s Party leader Benazir Bhutto. Pakistan was one of only three countries 
to recognize the Taliban regime of Afghanistan, after September 11, 2001. However, 
Pakistan reassessed its relations with the Taliban and pledged support to the United 
States and the international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom, which aimed at 
removing the Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are 
known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the 
Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban 
operates openly in Pakistan. Extremists led by the Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-Taliban 
“TTP”) commander and other Al-Qaida extremists have re-exerted their hold over areas 
in the FATA and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP). Taliban financing, which 
crosses the border of Pakistan to Afghanistan, has allowed the insurgency in 
Afghanistan to strengthen its military and technical capabilities. 
 
The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, including an increase in 
Al-Qaida’s presence to levels unseen since 2001-2002, driven in part by insurgent 
access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-Pakistan border. 
Although Al-Qaida’s core organization in the tribal areas of Pakistan was under greater 
pressure in 2009 than in 2008, it remained the most dangerous component of the larger 
Al-Qaida network. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al-Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported human 
rights violations include extrajudicial killings, torture and rape by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, wide-spread corruption, disappearance and 
imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in women and children. As of 
February 2009, the government maintained domestic intelligence services that 
monitored political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
intelligence agents. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to 
Pakistan in light of threats of terrorist activity. Since 2007, American citizens have been 
kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. Credible reports indicated that authorities 
routinely intercepted and opened mail without requisite court approval, and monitored 
mobile phones and electronic messages. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and F. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan;  Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country 
is not, of itself, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, the country in question must 
be considered. The Taliban and Al-Qaida operate in Pakistan. The permissive operating 
environment allows Al-Qaida to plan attacks against the United States and Western 
interests in Pakistan. Applicant testified to his own concerns for his mother’s safety in 
Pakistan, commenting that the situation is not good, there are suicide bombings, and 
the population is fearful. Applicant currently shares living quarters with Pakistani 
citizens, including his wife and his brother. In addition, after he sponsors his mother’s 
immigration to the United States, she will live permanently with him. Applicant’s actions 
and the record evidence indicate that he has ties of affection and obligation to his family 
 
 
8 
 
 
members who are citizens and/or residents of Pakistan. Such ties represent a 
heightened risk of exploitation and support application of AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d).  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, ¶8, especially 
the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 I cannot conclude that Applicant is unlikely to be placed in a position that could 
force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound by strong ties of 
affection to his wife and his brother, who are citizens of Pakistan. Moreover, he has 
close ties with his mother, who resides in a country that harbors terrorists and 
extremists, where human rights are violated, and the government intercepts telephone, 
electronic and postal correspondence. The record contains no evidence to show that 
Applicant's foreign relatives could not be subject to coercion that would force him to 
choose between their interests and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) cannot be 
applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered the extent of Applicant's 
U.S. ties, including his 16 years living in the United States, the completion of his 
education, his years of marriage, and the fact that his son was born in the United 
States. However, Applicant has close relationships with foreign nationals. He has been 
married to a Pakistani citizen for seven years. He has ties to his brother, who lives in the 
same house with Applicant and is still a citizen of Pakistan. His concern for his mother’s 
safety and his efforts to proceed with sponsoring her immigration to the United States 
demonstrate his strong ties of affection and obligation to her. Given Applicant's ongoing 
and strong ties to Pakistani citizens, I cannot confidently conclude he would resolve a 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s has close, non-casual relationships with Pakistani citizens, including 
his wife and his brother. Moreover, Applicant’s financial support to his mother, his strong 
desire and plan to sponsor her immigration to the United States, to bring her to live in 
his own home, and to support her here in the United States demonstrate his affection 
and sense of obligation to his mother. These facts raise a risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not mitigate Applicant’s situation.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant purchased a relatively expensive house in 2006, when his income was 
modest. Applicant‘s credit reports show that he has not had a history of financial 
problems, other than the mortgage debt. Disqualifying condition AG ¶19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts) applies. The record contains no evidence of other 
disqualifying conditions such as frivolous spending, or debts related to alcoholism, 
gambling or deceptive practices.  
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains conditions that can mitigate 
security concerns. In this case, AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are relevant. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant's 
delinquency, which began in 2009, is recent. However, Applicant purchased the house 
when he was 28 years old and inexperienced with the process and possible 
consequences. Part of the difficulty may also reflect on the lender, who found applicant 
to be qualified for the loans, despite the large disparity between the cost of the house 
and applicant's annual income. It is unlikely that he will engage in such behavior in the 
future. Moreover, Applicant’s adherence to the payment plan for the second mortgage 
and his otherwise solid credit reflect well on his reliability and trustworthiness. 
  
 Almost immediately after purchasing his house in 2006, Applicant lost his job. 
However, he was able to keep up with his mortgage payments between 2006 and 2009. 
Then his brothers stopped making the approximately 50 percent contribution to the 
 
 
10 
 
 
payments that they had been making. Neither his job loss nor his brothers’ actions were 
under Applicant's control. He acted responsibly in light of these events. He took his 
realtor’s suggestion to seek a short sale. He then agreed to the second lender’s 
requirement that he pay $5,000 toward the balance of the smaller loan. Finally, he 
followed through by making the payments over the past several months. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation], and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns surrounding his past delinquent mortgage 
debt. His young age and financial inexperience at the time contributed to his unwise 
decision to take on a high mortgage when his income was insufficient. However, his 
solid credit before and since this mistake, and his adherence to his payment plan, 
assuage doubts about his reliability.  
 
However, concerns remain about Applicant's foreign contacts. He maintains 
ongoing relationships with foreign nationals, including his mother, sisters, wife, and one 
brother. His attachment to his mother is evident in their continued contact, his concern 
for her safety, and his resulting desire to bring her out of an unsafe Pakistan and to the 
United States. He intends to sponsor her immigration to the United States, where she 
 
 
11 
 
 
will take up permanent residence with him. Moreover, Applicant's relationships are with 
citizens of Pakistan, a country that poses a heightened risk of exploitation.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised under the guideline for foreign influence. Such doubts must be resolved in favor 
of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e.  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
