 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On September 10, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions (SF 86). On October 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 4, 2010, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 11 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (GE), and mailed Applicant a complete copy on January 11, 2010. 
Applicant received the FORM on February 1, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to 
file objections and submit additional information. On February 25, 2010, he submitted 
three exhibits that I subsequently marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. On 
March 24, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations. Those admissions 
are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He enlisted in the 
U.S. Army in June 2001. He was honorably discharge in the paygrade E-4, in May 
2004. He attended college from December 2005 to September 2008 and earned a 
bachelor’s degree in computer science. He was unemployed from August 2006 to May 
2007 and from March 2008 to September 2008, at which time he began working for his 
current employer.  
 
 Applicant was in a relationship with a woman, who gave birth to a child in 
December 2000. He married the woman in August 2002. His wife later told him that he 
was not the father of her child. In May 2003, they divorced. In June 2004, a paternity 
test determined that he was not the biological father of the child (GE 3.) He had been 
paying child support and then stopped. A garnishment order for child support was 
entered in 2005. Based on his attorney’s advice, he did not file state and federal tax 
returns for the years 2005, 2006, and 2007, although he knew that he was entitled to a 
refund. The attorney told him to wait until the paternity issues were resolved because 
his tax refunds could be confiscated for unpaid child support. (GE 3.) In early 2009, he 
resolved the paternity issue and filed all outstanding tax returns. (Id.) After receiving 
about $8,600 in refunds for those years, he paid any outstanding child support 
obligations and some other debts. 1 (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant will file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy to discharge his delinquent debts 
because he does not earn enough money to pay them.2 (Id.) His attorney intends to file 
the petition in early spring. (AE B.) Applicant completed an online and telephone 
counseling session in February 2010, as required under bankruptcy law. (AE C.) 
   
 Prior to the issuance of the SOR in October 2009, a government investigator 
interviewed Applicant about his delinquent debts in November 2008. Applicant indicated 
that his financial delinquencies accumulated as the result of the garnishment order for 
child support and periods of unemployment, which left him with insufficient money to 
                                                          
1There is insufficient evidence in the record to clarify the amount of child support Applicant was 
required to pay and when his obligation for support terminated. Two states were involved in the child 
support issue.   
 
2Applicant did not submit a copy of his budget or Leave and Earnings statement to verify his 
assertions.  
 
3 
 
 
pay them. He admitted that he had not communicated with most of his creditors and did 
not have knowledge of several debts listed on credit bureau reports. (GE 5.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2008, January 2009, April 
2009, June 2009, and January 2010, the SOR alleged 29 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $52,000. The debts became delinquent between August 2004 and 
December 2009, and are owed to medical providers, department stores, credit card 
companies, and utility companies. (GE 7 through 11.) 
 
Applicant offered no corroborating evidence of any payment toward, or other 
attempt to resolve these debts, other than a plan to discharge them through a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy this spring. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his recent job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
 
4 
 
 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The evidence established security concerns under two Guideline F disqualifying 
conditions. Specifically, AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;@ and 
AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on five CBRs and his 
admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing 
in 2004. He demonstrated a six-year history of not meeting financial obligations. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties in 
AG ¶ 20. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
arose in 2004 and remain unresolved to date. Because the ongoing problems are not 
isolated and there is no evidence to support a finding that the delinquent indebtedness 
is unlikely to recur, this condition does not apply.   
 
5 
 
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed his financial problems to a garnishment order for child support for a child that 
was determined not to be his child, and periods of unemployment. Those may have 
been circumstances beyond his control; however, he did not offer any evidence that he 
attempted to act responsibly while the debts were accruing or after they accrued. This 
mitigating condition marginally applies.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant established no mitigation under these 
two provisions. He submitted evidence that he received a session or two of credit 
counseling in February 2010, however, that is not sufficient to warrant the application of 
AG & 20(c) as to credit counseling, and there is no additional evidence indicating that 
his financial delinquencies are under control, as required. He did not provide evidence 
that he paid, attempted to pay, or established a repayment plan for any debt, including 
small debts such as the $46 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, the $66 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1. bb, or the $91 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.cc. Nor is there evidence that he contacted 
any creditor over the past six years to resolve any of the 29 debts.  
 
Applicant filed all outstanding state and federal tax returns in early 2009, 
warranting the application of AG & 20(c), as to SOR ¶ 1.dd and SOR ¶ 1.ee, as those 
allegations are resolved. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
honorably served this country. However, he is responsible for his voluntary choices and 
conduct that underlie the security concerns set out in the SOR. He established a 
consistent pattern of financial irresponsibility dating back to 2004, with no evidence of 
efforts to resolve his outstanding obligations, including small debts, despite learning of 
the Government’s concerns in November 2008. At this time, he intends to discharge his 
delinquent debts through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, claiming that he cannot afford to 
repay them. 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation so a recurrence of his 
financial problems is likely. The record contains insufficient other evidence about his 
character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their 
continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.cc:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.dd and 1.ee:       For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
