                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04209 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 17, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On December 11, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 4, 2010. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On February 1, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2
Applicant at that time. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on February 
16, 2010. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on March 18, 2010. I received the case assignment on April 21, 
2010. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations contained in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR. 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant is 49 years old, divorced, and has one child. He works for a defense 
contractor. He started work for this employer in March 2008. (Items 5, 6) 
 
Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $23,776 on an income tax 
lien entered by the IRS against him in April 2009. This lien arose when Applicant did not 
pay the income tax on a profit-sharing bonus from a previous employer in 2004. The 
credit report dated December 8, 2009, shows this lien remains in effect. The IRS 
garnished Applicant’s wages to pay the tax on the bonus. (Items 5-10) 
 
Applicant owes a mortgage lender approximately $76,186 on his delinquent 
mortgage account. This mortgage was on a house Applicant purchased but could no 
longer afford when he was terminated by a former employer in February 2008. 
Applicant’s home was foreclosed by his lender. (Items 5-10) 
 
Applicant did not disclose on his e-QIP his mortgage delinquency and his late 
payments of more than 180 days on three credit cards he had. Applicant answered “no” 
on Question 28 (a) which sought to know if he had been more than 180 days delinquent 
on any debt in the past seven years. (Items 5-10) 
 
Applicant did not disclose in response to Question 28 (b) that he was more than 
90 days delinquent on his mortgage. That question sought disclosure of any current 
debt delinquency of more than 90 days. (Items 5-10)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
 
 
 
 
 
3
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
 
 
4
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy; and,   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has two significant delinquent debts. He owes the IRS $23,776 for 
income taxes he did not pay on a 2004 bonus received from a former employer. It is 
Applicant’s duty to report the income and pay the taxes on it. Applicant also owes a 
mortgage lender $76,186 on a mortgage he stopped paying in 2008. The house is being 
foreclosed, but Applicant still owes the mortgage balance offset by any sale price for the 
property. The evidence raises both potential disqualifications.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only two mitigating conditions might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. Applicant offered no 
explanation for his failure to pay his income taxes on the 2004 bonus. He claimed he 
could not pay his mortgage after losing his job in February 2008, but was employed in 
March 2008 to the current time by his present employer. His explanation about his 
mortgage default is not persuasive. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Applicant’s wages were garnished to pay his IRS lien. Garnishment is not a 
voluntary action. He defaulted on his mortgage and it was foreclosed by the lender. This 
action is not a good-faith effort to pay his mortgage. Applicant has not mitigated his 
financial considerations security concerns. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern, one of 
which may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his mortgage financial delinquency and late payments 
on three credit cards as alleged in SOR Paragraph 2. His Answer offers only the 
statement that his mortgage was in foreclosure and he was in the process of finding 
what he needed to do. Applicant provided no explanation about the credit cards or why 
he did not disclose the information about his delinquent payments. Moreover, the 
foreclosure was the result of his deliberate failure to pay his mortgage. He deliberately 
failed to state truthful answers to the government’s Questions 28 (a) and 28 (b) about 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 17 describes seven mitigating conditions that might apply to said 
disqualification. I considered each condition as applied to the facts in this case. None 
apply. Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof that any mitigating condition applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts and subsequently failing to 
adequately address them. He did not provide any explanation for his deliberately false 
answers to Questions 28 (a) and 28 (b).  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. He did not mitigate the security concerns under the guideline 
for Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
