                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02897 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 30, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) as part of his employment with a defense contractor. 
On November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for criminal 
conduct and alcohol consumption, Guidelines G and J respectively. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
November 23, 2009. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 10, 2010. He admitted all of the 13 
allegations of alcohol consumption under Guideline G, and the one allegation of criminal 
conduct under Guideline J. He provided a detailed explanation and documentation 
concerning his conduct. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge.   
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 17, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on February 22, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
March 10, 2010, for a hearing on April 6, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
The Government offered six exhibits, marked Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 
6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his behalf and offered 19 
exhibits marked Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A through S, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 14, 2010. Based on 
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted all the allegations under both 
alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. His admissions are included in my findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is 34 years old and has worked for his defense contractor employer for 
more than two years as a systems analyst and computer programmer. He has a 
Bachelor of Science degree in computer science and systems information. Applicant 
met his wife in 2003 and they married in 2006. He has two stepchildren, one with 
special needs. (Tr. 40-44, 49-50; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated October 30, 2009)  
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse dating back to 1989. He was in high 
school from 1989 until 1993. He started drinking alcohol in his freshman year with his 
classmates and friends. His alcohol consumption increased in intensity until in his senior 
year, he was intoxicated once or twice a month. After high school, he worked from 1994 
until 1997 and again was intoxicated a few times a month. He started college full time in 
1997, graduating in 2000. He worked as a cook in a pub while in college. He would 
drink seven or eight beers after work and walk home. Since he walked to class, work, 
and home, he did not have any alcohol-related driving offenses while in college. As he 
got older, his pattern of drinking alcohol slowed down. However, Applicant admits that 
he consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication from approximately 1991 
until December 2009. (SOR 1.a; Tr. 44-49, 71-72)  
 
In 1993, when he was 18 years of age, he was arrested for possession of alcohol 
and possession of marijuana. (SOR 1.b) Applicant was at a party when police arrived 
because of complaints concerning noise. The police found marijuana and alcohol in a 
common area. Everyone at the residence, including Applicant, was charged with 
possession of alcohol and marijuana since the marijuana and alcohol were found in a 
common area. The charges were dismissed after Applicant performed community 
service. (Gov. Ex. 2, Answer to Interrogatories, Testimonies, dated December 8, 2008 - 
December 30, 2008 at 7; Gov. Ex. 3 and 4, FBI Criminal Justice Information Reports; 
App. Ex. D, Police Report , dated July 11, 1993) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated in 1997 (SOR 1.c). He 
worked over 16 hours at two restaurants when he stopped at a third restaurant to 
inquire about a job. He had a beer while waiting for the owner to talk to him. When he 
left the restaurant, he was stopped by the police. He refused a breathalyzer test 
because he had consumed the beer and felt the test would not accurately reflect his 
alcohol level. Applicant pled guilty to, and was found guilty of, reckless driving and paid 
a fine and completed an alcohol counseling course. (Tr. 53-55; Gov. Ex 3, Answer to 
Interrogatories, Testimonies, dated December 8, 2008 - December 30, 2008, at 3; 
Response to SOR, Attorney's Letter, dated January 7, 2010, at 1) 
 
Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated in June 2001 in the same 
jurisdiction as the 1997 offense. (SOR 1.d) He had graduated from college about six 
months earlier, and was drinking heavily at the time. He was stopped by police early in 
the morning. The police officer noticed a strong smell of alcohol and Applicant's red 
eyes. Applicant refused a roadside field sobriety test and a breathalyzer test at the 
police station. He again pled guilty to reckless driving and paid a fine. (Tr. 55-58; Gov. 
Ex. 3, FBI Criminal Justice Information; Gov. Ex. 5, Booking Report, dated June 9, 
2001; Response to SOR, Attorney's Letter, dated January 7, 2010) 
 
Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated in a neighboring state in 
March 2002. (SOR 1.e) Applicant was at a restaurant visiting a female friend. He drank 
alcohol and become intoxicated. On the way home, he was stopped by the police. He 
was found guilty of driving while intoxicated, was ordered to pay a fine, and to attend 
and complete an alcohol counseling class. (Tr. 58-59; Gov. Ex 4, FBI Criminal Justice 
Information; Gov. Ex. 3, Answers to Interrogatories, Testimonies, dated December 8, 
2008 until December 30, 2008 at 3-4) Applicant paid the fine, completed community 
service, and completed an alcohol class at a nearby treatment center. (SOR 1.f; App. 
Ex. E, Letter, dated February 17, 2010; App. Ex. F, Certificate, dated October 21, 2002)  
 
In June 2003, Applicant was scheduled to be interviewed by security 
investigators concerning his application for a security clearance. Applicant was late for 
the interview. When he arrived, he smelled of alcohol and looked intoxicated to both the 
security investigator and the facility security officer. The interview was terminated and 
processing of the background investigation was discontinued. (SOR 1.g; Gov. Ex. 6, 
Memorandum, dated June 13, 2003) Applicant was referred for treatment of alcohol 
abuse by his employer. He attended and completed the required treatments from 
December 2003 until April 2004. He also attended the required 90 Alcoholic Anonymous 
(AA) sessions in 90 days. He believes the counselor may have diagnosed him as an 
alcoholic. He remembers her telling him that rarely can a person go back to social 
drinking when they have become an alcoholic. (Gov. Ex. 2, Answer to Interrogatories, 
Testimony, dated December 3, 2008 - December 30, 2008, at 8; App. Ex. G, Letter, 
dated December 2, 2003; App. Ex. H, AA Log, December 2003 until March 2004; App. 
Ex. I, Letter, dated undated)  
 
Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated in September 2003. (SOR 
1.h) Applicant had previously injured his ankle and could not successfully perform a field 
 
4 
 
 
sobriety test. He had been drinking alcohol that night but did not believe he was 
intoxicated. He pled guilty to reckless driving and paid a fine. (Tr. 59-60; Gov. Ex. 3, FBI 
Criminal Justice Information; Answer to SOR, Attorney's Letter, dated January 7, 2010; 
App. Ex. J, Doctor's Report on ankle, dated October 7, 2003) 
 
Applicant was arrested for assault and battery in February 2005 after an 
altercation with his wife, who at the time of the incident was his girlfriend. (SOR1.i) The 
couple had been drinking that night at a neighbor's house and his girlfriend went home 
early. Applicant returned to their house later and was intoxicated. There was an 
argument and the girlfriend slapped Applicant. As Applicant left the room, the girlfriend 
threw a dog bone at Applicant. He responded by picking up the dog bone and throwing 
it at the girlfriend hitting her in the head and causing bleeding. Police arrived and the 
girlfriend was taken to the hospital. Applicant completed an outpatient alcohol treatment 
program that was mainly classroom work and counseling. (SOR 1.j). Applicant believes 
he was diagnosed as an alcoholic but his prognosis was good. His girlfriend requested 
the charges be dropped. The charges were dismissed and the charges expunged from 
the record. (Tr. 60; Gov. Ex. 2, Answers to Interrogatories, Testimonies, dated 
December 8, 2008 - December 30, 2008 at 5; Answer to SOR, Attorney's Letter, dated 
January 7, 2010; App. Ex. K, Expungement Order, dated August 23, 2005) 
 
In 2008, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated, resisting arrest, and 
disobeying a police officer in another state where he was then working on temporary 
duty for the defense contractor. Applicant had been drinking and pulled into a gas 
station to get gas and call a taxicab since his ability to drive was impaired. While he was 
waiting for the taxicab to arrive, he was arrested for driving while intoxicated since he 
was intoxicated and drove to the gas station. Applicant was drinking alcohol because 
his wife left the area to attend to the special needs child at their home location. 
Applicant started drinking to overcome his anxiety and depression. Applicant was found 
guilty on March 3, 2008, and sentenced to complete a multiple offender program, 
ordered to pay a fine, and his driver's license was suspended for two years. (SOR 1.l)  
 
Applicant started to see a psychologist after this offense. (SOR 1.k) There is no 
information to show he was told to not drink alcohol. Applicant started attending AA 
meetings. He was unable to complete an in-residence alcohol offender program 
because his flight back to the area was cancelled and he arrived late for the treatment. 
Before Applicant could be rescheduled, the program was terminated for budget 
reasons. Applicant had also by this time been transferred by his employer back to his 
home state. Applicant is now enrolled in a multiple offender alcohol counseling program 
which he should complete soon and receive his driver's license back (Tr. 60-61; Gov. 
Ex. 2, Answer to Interrogatories, Testimonies, December 2, 2008 - December 30, 2008, 
at 1-2; App. Ex. L, AA Log, March 2002 to May 2008; App. Ex. M, Cancelled Airline 
Ticket; App. Ex. N, Article on Alcohol Program cancellation, dated October 20, 2009) 
 
Applicant was arrested four days after the above incident on March 7, 2008, for 
criminal trespass and simple assault. (SOR 1.m) Applicant was in a pool hall and got 
into a confrontation with two other men. Based on the statements of witnesses, he was 
 
5 
 
 
arrested for simple assault and trespass. He consumed alcohol prior to his arrest. He 
does not remember the incident clearly since he believes he was knocked unconscious. 
He had a head wound and was taken to the hospital. The charges were reduced to 
simple assault and he was fined $250. He paid the fine. (Gov. Ex. 2, Answers to 
Interrogatories, Testimony, dated December 3, 2008 - December 3, 2008 at 4-5) 
 
Applicant's last drink of alcohol was New Year's Eve 2010. He was last 
intoxicated in December 2009. He had not been attending AA meetings until he 
returned to meetings in January 2010 after an argument with his wife. His wife still 
consumes alcohol, sometimes at their house. Every time in the past that he stopped 
drinking, it was his wife who brought alcohol back to the house and he started 
consuming alcohol. This time he started attending AA meetings rather than drink 
alcohol. Applicant and his wife do some AA activities together. He admits he is probably 
an alcoholic. He has been seeing an alcohol counselor for the last month, and attending 
and participating in an alcohol rehabilitation program. He has a sponsor and has 
received AA chips for his participation. (Tr. 61-75; App. Ex. O, Card; App. Ex. P, AA Log 
February/March 2010; App. Ex. Q, AA Contract, undated)  
 
Applicant is highly regarded by all of his employers. Prior to his employment with 
the defense contractor, Applicant was a computer lab assistant from September 1998 to 
November 1998. His supervisor noted that he was a dependable and responsible 
employee. His work ethic was excellent and he was consistently on time. He was 
trusted with projects requiring follow-up and correspondence. (App. Ex. A, Letter, 
undated) Applicant received commendations for his work as a college student on a 
conference presentation concerning math, computer science, and science education. 
(App. Ex. B, Letter, dated April 6, 2000) He was also commended for his outstanding 
research in this area. (App. Ex. C, Certificate, dated March 31, 2000) He was a co-
author on a scientific paper published in the Journal of Molecular Neuroscience. (App. 
Ex. G, Article, dated October 2001) Applicant's present supervisor stated he has known 
Applicant for over 18 months. Applicant has been one of the company's key developers 
of software programs. He considers Applicant to be a man of integrity who honors his 
commitments. (App. Ex. R, Letter, dated January 5, 2010) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
6 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct 
 
Applicant admitted the 14 alcohol consumption security concerns. Eight of the 
alcohol consumption concerns resulted in criminal charges and raise the Criminal 
Conduct Security concerns. Both alcohol consumption and criminal conduct raise 
similar security concerns and will be discussed together. Excessive alcohol 
consumption is a security concern because it often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) Criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(AG ¶ 30)  
 
Applicant's arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol, possession of 
alcohol as a minor, assault and battery involving alcohol consumption, and reporting to 
a security investigation intoxicated and smelling of alcohol raise Alcohol Consumption 
 
7 
 
 
Disqualifying Conditions (AC DC) AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent), AC DC AG ¶ 22(b) (alcohol-related 
incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired 
condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); AC DC AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuse or alcohol dependent).  
 
Applicant has seen a number of medical professionals for counseling and 
treatment of his alcohol consumption. Applicant believes some of them have diagnosed 
him as an alcoholic, raising AD DC AG ¶ 22(e) (evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program).  
 
Applicant's multiple arrests for driving while intoxicated and conviction of some of 
these offenses, his underage possession of alcohol, and assault and battery involving 
alcohol raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) AG ¶ 31(a) (a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and CD DC AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted). 
 
 I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) AG ¶ 23(a) (so 
much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and determine that it 
does not apply. Applicant admits drinking to the point of intoxication from his early high 
school years in approximately 1991 until just six months ago in December 2009. There 
were nine incidents involving alcohol consumption at work, away from work, and in the 
community from 1993 until 2008. Applicant drank alcohol freely and willingly so none of 
these incidents happened under unusual circumstances. His alcohol consumption is 
recent since the last time he was intoxicated was only six months ago. He has a long 
history of alcohol-related problems covering almost half his life. Applicant willingly drank 
alcohol and his willingness to drink alcohol could lead to more alcohol-related future 
incidents.   
 
 I also considered AC MC AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her 
alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome 
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)). The mitigating condition does have some 
application to Applicant. Applicant has recently acknowledged that he has an alcohol 
problem. His wife drinks alcohol and brings it to their house. But Applicant decided to 
attend alcohol counseling and AA meetings rather than drink. However, he has 
exhibited this conduct for only the last few months. AC MC AG ¶ 23(c) (the individual is 
a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no 
 
8 
 
 
history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress); and AC 
MC AG ¶ 23(d) (the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations, such as participation in meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous 
or a similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program) does not apply. Applicant attended alcohol 
counseling and treatment because it was part of his sentence for alcohol-related 
offenses. While Applicant successfully the programs in the past, he has continued to 
drink alcohol. He only recently started to attend AA meetings again and is seeing an 
alcohol counselor. While it is too soon in his treatment to determine if his attendance at 
meetings and his counseling will be successful, the allegation against Applicant is that 
he attended counseling on three separate occasions. As noted, he successfully 
completed that counseling and treatment. I find for Applicant on these three allegations 
(SOR 1.f, 1.j, and 1.k). Applicant receives credit for attending and completing the 
counseling. 
 
 In total, Applicant has not presented sufficient information to meet his burden to 
establish that his past alcohol use is under control and his alcohol consumption does 
not reflect now on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Appellant has not 
mitigated security concerns for alcohol consumption. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under criminal conduct. 
Applicant raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) AG ¶ 
32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and CC MC AG ¶ 32(d) 
(there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement). There 
was a pattern of alcohol-related criminal conduct from as early as 1993. In some years, 
there was more than one offense. The criminal offenses did not happen under unusual 
or unique circumstances, but were the end result of Applicant's excessive alcohol 
consumption. Similar criminal incidents are likely to recur because Applicant's 
abstinence from alcohol is only recent, his wife is still an alcohol consumer in their 
house, and he has only recently again started attending AA and alcohol counseling. He 
could easily decide to start drinking alcohol again. Applicant has not presented sufficient 
information to mitigate security concerns for criminal conduct.  
  
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is a good 
employee and has done excellent work in the past. I considered that Applicant has been 
attending AA meetings recently and has been seeing an alcohol counselor. However, 
Applicant was an excessive user of alcohol for over 17 years. He was in and out of 
alcohol counseling and programs only because the counseling and programs were a 
part of his sentence from alcohol-related driving offenses. His last alcohol-related 
incident was in 2008. He was last intoxicated in December 2009, and his last drink of 
alcohol was on New Year's Eve 2009/2010. Sufficient time without alcohol-related 
incidents, adequate and sufficient alcohol counseling, a sufficient period of time to 
indicate rehabilitation, and an adequate period of AA meeting attendance has not 
passed to mitigate alcohol consumption issues given Applicant's long history of alcohol 
use and abuse. His alcohol-related actions indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, 
and unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. I find for Applicant on the three 
allegations for attending counseling and alcohol treatment. Overall, on balance the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and alcohol 
consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j - 1.k:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l - 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
