 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-03707 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On February 16, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 20, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 4, 2010, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 10 Items, 
 
2 
 
 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on February 8, 2010. Applicant received the 
FORM on February 11, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. She did not submit any additional information. On April 
21, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations, except those 
alleged in ¶ 1.a, ¶ 1.d, and ¶ 1.g. Those admissions are incorporated into the following 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She received a 
bachelor’s degree in December 1990. She is unmarried. Since June 2001, she has 
worked as a staff analyst for her current employer. (Item 5.) 
 
 On March 17, 2009, Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss her 
unpaid debts. During that interview, she acknowledged that she had a federal tax lien 
that she paid off in 2005 or 2006. She admitted that she had four accounts with one 
credit card company that she closed seven or eight years ago. She claimed that she 
paid other accounts. She indicated that she would contact some of the creditors. She 
accrued the delinquent debts when she was working as a hair stylist and part-time bank 
teller, and did not earn enough money. She acknowledged that she was “overspending” 
at the time. (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated February 2009, and June 2009, the 
SOR alleged a tax lien, eight delinquent debts, and two judgments, totaling $21,400. 
The $5,288 tax lien was filed in 1998 and the two judgments were entered in 1995.1 
(Item 10.) The remaining debts became delinquent between May 2002 and February 
2009, and are owed to department stores and credit card companies. (Items 8, 9.) 
 
Applicant asserted during the March 2009 interview that the tax lien and some of 
the delinquent debts were paid. However, she offered no corroborating documentary 
evidence to support her assertions, or proof of payment, or attempts to resolve these or 
any of her other debts. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her job 
performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
                                                          
1Applicant paid three tax liens in 2002, unrelated to the tax lien alleged in the SOR. (Item 7 at 9.)  
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The evidence established security concerns under two Guideline F disqualifying 
conditions, specifically, AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;@ and 
AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on two CBRs and her 
admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing 
in 1995. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising under financial 
considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(a), a disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
arose in 1995 when two judgments were entered against her, and again in 1998 when a 
tax lien was filed. Those and other delinquent debts that accrued subsequently remain 
unresolved to date. Because the ongoing problems are not isolated, and there is no 
evidence to support a finding that the delinquent indebtedness is unlikely to recur, this 
condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed her financial problems to a previous low paying position and overspending. 
While her past underemployment may be a contributing factor, her acknowledged 
overspending was not a condition beyond her control. This mitigating condition does not 
apply.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
 
5 
 
 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant established no mitigation under these 
two conditions. She did not submit any evidence that she received credit counseling or 
that her financial problems are under control. She did not provide evidence that she 
paid, attempted to pay, or established a repayment plan for the tax lien, two judgments, 
or eight delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor for nine years. In early March 2009, she learned of 
the Government’s concerns relating to her finances and indicated that she would 
contact creditors. In November 2009, the Government filed a SOR. In February 2010, 
the Government filed the FORM. For more than a year, she was on notice of the 
financial issues that were creating security concerns and potentially affecting her 
employment. Despite that, she did not address them or provide proof that she 
previously addressed them. Applicant failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation so 
the possibility of recurrence or continuance of these unaddressed obligations is likely. 
The record contains insufficient other evidence about her character, trustworthiness, or 
reliability to mitigate these concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:       Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
