 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-02392  
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for use of 
information technology systems, handling protected information, and personal conduct. 
Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing, 
which he signed on August 28, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 On August 24, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its finding: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems), Guideline K (Handling 
Protected Information), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer September 14, 2009, in which 
he admitted all the allegations in the Statement of Reasons except the following: 1.a., 
1.b., 2.b., 3.a., 3.b., 3.e., and 3.f. He also requested a decision without a hearing. 
 
On November 16, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant 
material (FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary decision to deny 
Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The FORM contained eight 
documents, identified as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The FORM and 
exhibits were forwarded to Applicant. He received the package on November 25, 2009, 
and submitted a Reply to the FORM. The case was assigned to another administrative 
judge, and subsequently transferred to me on March 5, 2010, for an administrative 
decision based on the record. Subsequently, Applicant submitted am additional 
document, signed on May 3, 2010. Department Counsel did not object, and I admitted 
the document to the record as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He has been married since 1974 and has two sons, 18 
and 25 years of age. He earned a masters degree in 1992. Since 1980, he has worked 
for the same defense contractor, where his holds the position of principal systems 
administrator. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant held a security clearance since 1981, at the secret and top secret 
levels. (GE 4) During the course of his security investigations, Applicant disclosed 
information about his conduct while he performed his job as a systems administrator 
from the 1990s to 2006. Based on findings from these investigations, his program 
access was revoked on September 18, 2006 by another government agency (AGA). 
He appealed the decision, and wrote a Response to the allegations (“Response”), 
dated November 1, 2006. (GE 7, p. 27-38) The decision to revoke was affirmed in 
August 2007. (GE 7, p. 22-23) 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which apply to all 
adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
 
3
                                                
 In performing his job as a systems administrator, Applicant worked on his 
coworkers’ computers to repair problems or improve performance. Applicant looked at 
material he thought was classified on a co-worker’s computer, without having a “need 
to know” the contents.3 During a security interview on May 26, 2006, he admitted that 
he did not have a need to know the contents of the file, and looked at the document 
because he was curious. (GE 7, p. 70) However, in his November 2006 Response, he 
notes that he had to see the file contents in order to be sure that the file had been 
repaired. (GE 7, pp. 30-31) During the May 2006 interview, he also discussed looking 
at a document on his supervisor’s computer in 1999. His supervisor at the time was the 
lead on a project at a branch office that Applicant's company was supporting. The 
material was classified, and Applicant did not have a need to know the information. He 
admitted that he sometimes looked at material on employees’ computers because he 
was curious. (GE 7, pp. 9, 70-71) In his post-hearing submission of 2010, Applicant 
notes that he was recently informed by “the supervisor” (not further identified) that if he 
received permission to work on a computer, then he was considered to have a need to 
know the information he would see in the process of performing that work. Applicant 
stated he was unaware of this fact when he viewed classified material on other 
worker’s computers in the past. (AE A)  
 
 Applicant also admitted, during a security interview on July 23, 2001, that he 
removed computer parts from company computers and used them in his home 
computer. The parts, including a small computer system interface (SCSI) card and 
floppy disks, were from unclassified computers. (GE 7, p. 78) In his Answer, Applicant 
denies this allegation, calling it a “total fabrication.” (GE 3) 
 
 In about 2005–2006, Applicant used the classified passwords of four coworkers 
to access their accounts to work on email and start-up issues. (GE 7, p. 9, 60, 63) 
Applicant noted in his FORM Reply that the coworkers gave him their passwords and “I 
didn’t argue with them.”  
  
 In his May 2006 security interview, Applicant stated that in about 2001, his 
supervisor was not allowing him to do enough work on their team. He used his system 
administrator access to look at files on her personal drive to check if she was leaving 
him out of some of the work. He stated he looked only at file titles, not content. 
However, in his July 2001 interview, Applicant admitted opening two of his supervisor’s 
computer files. In his February and April 2001 interviews, he stated he accessed his 
supervisor’s files out of curiosity. (GE 7, p. 58, 72, 78)  
 
 During the May 2006 interview, Applicant was also asked if he had gone through 
his supervisor’s desk. Applicant became emotional, cried, and stated he had not told 
any security officials of this “deep dark secret,” but that in 2001 he had gone through 
her desk to find out her salary. However, in his Response of November 2006, Applicant 
 
3 The date of this event is unclear. SOR ¶ 2.a places it in the “late 1990s.” Applicant noted in his 
interview of May 2006 that it occurred “one to two years ago,” which would have been 2004 – 2005. (GE 
7, p. 70) However, in his Answer of November 1, 2006, he said it occurred in 1995. (GE 7, p. 30)  
 
 
4
                                                
stated that he had permission to go through her desk to look for diskettes, and that he 
saw the salary information inadvertently. (GE 7, pp.30, 72)  
 
 In the July 2001 security interview, Applicant admitted downloading 
pornographic material from the internet to a company computer every few months 
between 1998 and 2001, spending 45 to 60 minutes each time. The most recent 
occurrence (at that point in time) was in July 2001. (GE 7, p. 78) Applicant contends in 
his FORM Reply that he did not download pornographic material, but simply viewed it. 
He also questions whether the material he viewed, similar to photographs in adult 
magazines, is pornography.  
 
 In January 2002, Applicant's employer issued him a letter of reprimand that 
stated, in pertinent part, 
 
…while at work you were looking at pornographic images while you were 
involved with inappropriate personal conduct.4 As a condition for working 
with sensitive, national security level program information, you are 
required, per U.S. Government policy, to maintain the highest standards 
of personal conduct. The above aspects of your behavior are, or have 
been in violation of this policy.  
 
The letter concluded that future personal conduct incidents could lead to revocation of 
his access, and that his signature indicated his acknowledgement and understanding 
of the policy. On January 2, 2002, Applicant signed the letter. (GE 7, p. 106) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant violated security rules by carrying a flash memory device into 
a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) between four and eight times. 
He stated he did not realize the device was in his pocket. (GE 3, GE 7, p. 9-10, 60) 
During his security interview of July 2006, he admitted that, in February 2006, he 
knowingly brought an activated cell phone into the SCIF. After checking that no one 
was in the SCIF, he entered it with his cell phone turned on. He knew it was prohibited 
by security rules, but did it for the thrill, and to see if he could avoid being caught. (GE 
7, p. 60) In his November 2006 Response, Applicant stated that this was a “minor 
mistake in judgment” and that he will not do it again. (GE 7, p. 33) In 2006, Applicant 
also left a classified document unsecured for two to three days. Although it was inside 
the SCIF, it was not in a locked safe, as required. He was verbally reprimanded by his 
program security officer. (GE 7, p. 62, 71) 
 
 
4 The letter does not specify the nature of the “inappropriate personal conduct.” However, during the July 
2001 interview, Applicant admitted masturbating at work, approximately five times, once in February 
2001, and at other times four to six years earlier. (GE 7, p. 76) However, in his May 2006 security 
interview, he denied masturbating at work. (GE 7, p. 63, 71) There is no indication whether the 
inappropriate conduct cited by Applicant's company’s letter was masturbation. This conduct is not 
alleged, and will not be considered as part of the Whole-Person analysis because Applicant did not have 
notice that it was an issue in his case. 
 
 
5
                                                
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised AG.5 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern related to use of information technology 
systems:  
 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern, 
including the following relevant conditions:  
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; and 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
As a systems administrator, Applicant was able to access other workers’ computer 
files. In 2001, he used his status to gain unauthorized entry into his supervisor’s 
personal computer files. Also in 2001, Applicant engaged in unauthorized use of an 
information technology system when he viewed pornographic material on a company 
computer. Disqualifying conditions 40(a) and 40(e) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of a 
supervisor. 
 
After using a company computer to view pornography in 2001, Applicant received a 
letter of reprimand and was warned that such conduct in the future would place his 
access in jeopardy. Applicant also used his system administrator access to satisfy his 
personal desire to see sensitive information in his supervisor’s personal computer files. 
His actions occurred during his routine work, not in unusual circumstances. Moreover, 
 
 
7
his conduct was neither minor nor inadvertent; he committed serious and intentional 
breaches of the trust placed in system administrators. Although this conduct occurred 
several years ago, the intentional nature of Applicant's actions, and the gravity of his 
breach of trust outweigh the distance in time. AG ¶ 41(a), (b), and (c) do not apply. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 raise a security concern: 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual's need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
Applicant violated security rules numerous times in 2006. He admits bringing a flash 
memory device into the SCIF, claiming it was inadvertent. However, Applicant brought 
the device in not once or twice, but four to eight times. During the same time period, he 
carried an activated cell phone into the SCIF. Applicant admitted to a security 
investigator that he brought the cell phone into the SCIF intentionally, for the thrill, and 
to see if he could “get away with it.” He also failed to secure a classified document 
within the SCIF. These events all occurred within the short time frame in 2006 before 
his access was suspended in March 2006. AG ¶ 34 (g) applies to Applicant's deliberate 
failure to follow security rules about the flash device and the cell phone. I find that AG ¶ 
34(h) applies to his negligent conduct in failing to secure a classified document,. 
However, it applies only in part, because the record does not indicate if Applicant was 
counseled. 
 
Applicant also admitted during security interviews that he viewed material on 
co-workers’ classified computers because he was curious, although he did not have a 
“need to know” the information. In 2001, he specifically sought to and did access 
sensitive information in his supervisor’s computer files that he was not authorized to 
view. He also viewed a document in 1999 on the computer of another supervisor at a 
branch office. AG ¶ 34(f) applies.  
 
 
8
 
AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns, including the 
following relevant condition: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant's actions did not occur under unusual circumstances, but rather in the regular 
course of his duties. Although several occurred approximately ten years ago, some 
events happened in 2006, about four years ago, which is more recent. Applicant 
committed a series of security violations in 2006, all before his access was suspended 
in March 2006. The record contains no indication of further security violations, but this 
may stem from the fact that Applicant's access was revoked in September 2006. 
Adherence to security rules is key to the industrial security program. Applicant's actions 
reflect poorly on his reliability and trustworthiness, and AG ¶ 35(a) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information;… 
 
 
 
9
                                                
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing…; 
 
The SOR alleges that in 2001, Applicant deliberately searched his supervisor's desk for 
salary information. In November 2006, Applicant denied this allegation. However, a few 
months earlier, during a security interview in May 2006, Applicant admitted doing so. I 
find that he did not view his supervisor’s salary information inadvertently, and his claim 
that it was unintentional is misleading and an attempt to avoid responsibility for his 
conduct. Moreover, when he admitted going through her desk, he cried, and called his 
actions a “deep, dark secret” that he had not disclosed to any security officials. His 
behavior and statements indicate that his conduct was embarrassing to him, and that 
he wished it to remain secret. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. In addition, although Applicant 
vehemently denied this SOR allegation, the evidence shows he admitted in July 2001 
that he removed company computer parts for use in his personal computer. His 
conduct was untrustworthy behavior that falls under AG ¶ 16(d)(1). 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under 
Personal Conduct guideline. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply, for the reasons discussed under Guidelines M and K. 
Regarding mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(e), Applicant’s behavior when he disclosed that 
he looked in his supervisor’s desk shows that he was very embarrassed by it, and he 
admitted that he had not disclosed it to his security officer. It constitutes a basis for 
exploitation. As the record evidence does not show when or if Applicant ever disclosed 
his conduct to his supervisor, security officer, or anyone else, there is no way to 
discern if it still represents a source of vulnerability to exploitation. Under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence, however, even if it has now been disclosed, Applicant was 
vulnerable to exploitation during the period when it had not been disclosed and 
remained a secret.9 AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 91-0259 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct 7, 1992). 
 
 
10
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant looked at coworkers’ classified files, deliberately viewed his 
supervisor’s personal computer files and private information in her desk, and obtained 
workers’ classified passwords while he worked on their computers. He made himself 
vulnerable to exploitation because he engaged in conduct that was embarrassing and 
that he did not want revealed. He entered a SCIF with prohibited items, including an 
active cell phone and a flash device. He failed to secure a classified document and was 
reprimanded. He viewed pornography at work, and his company issued him a letter of 
reprimand. His conduct cannot be mitigated based on youthful indiscretion, because he 
was a mature adult between 45 and 55 years of age when these events occurred. 
Each time he knowingly engaged in this conduct, he placed his own desires above the 
government’s need for reliable and trustworthy conduct in those to whom it grants 
security clearances.  
 
 Although much of the conduct in the SOR is old, the repeated nature of 
Applicant's untrustworthy actions, from the 1990s to 2006, is a concern. Moreover, a 
person who violates rules, particularly when it is intentional, undermines the trust that is 
key to the success of the security program. There is no evidence in the record of 
problems between 2002 when Applicant received the letter of reprimand, and 2006. 
But at that point, Applicant had numerous security lapses, and also deliberately 
violated security rules for the thrill of it. This re-emergence of security violations raises 
concerns. In addition, he has given incomplete and conflicting information during his 
numerous security interviews and responses to the government. The fact that Applicant 
engaged in untrustworthy conduct while held a security clearance is most significant, 
 
 
11
and raises doubts about whether he is willing or able to avoid recurrence of such 
behavior in the future and to fulfill the obligations imposed on those who are granted 
security clearances.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline K   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.f.   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. - 3.f.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
