                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03814 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On October 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 21, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 26, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on April 20, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(AE) A through Q, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He is a high school graduate and served four years in 
the Navy before being honorably discharged in 1998. He married in 2006 and has a two 
and a half-year-old son. In 2003, Applicant began working as a real estate appraiser. 
His wife is a real estate agent.1  
 
 In 1999, Applicant purchased condominium #1 in State A. He sold it in 2003 and 
made a profit of $160,000. He used the profit to purchase condominium #2 in State A. 
He sold it in 2007 and made a profit of approximately $110,000 to $120,000. He put this 
money in a bank account.2  
 
In 2006, Applicant moved to State B. He purchased a home in July 2006, and 
this was his primary residence for a period of time. He secured a loan from the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.e for approximately $174,955. He paid about a $5,000 down payment on the 
property.3  
 
In April 2007, Applicant purchased another home in State B, but in a different 
city. He obtained two loans for his mortgage. One was for 80% of the purchase price, 
$374,666, (SOR ¶ 1.d) and the other was for the remaining 20%, $91,888 (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
He paid approximately $5,000 for a down payment. He and his wife moved into this 
house. He kept the other house and used it as a home office and allowed his brother to 
live in it. His brother did not pay rent. Applicant and his wife were earning enough 
income to pay for both houses. They never refinanced the two houses to take equity 
out.4 
 
In late 2007, the real estate market was beginning to plummet. Applicant and his 
wife’s income were dependent upon the real estate market. In September 2007, 
Applicant’s son was born. In November 2007, Applicant’s source of income did not exist 
because there were very few real estate transactions occurring. He and his wife began 
using the profit from the condominium sale and savings to pay their mortgages and bills. 
Applicant contacted the mortgage lenders and told them his circumstances, but they did 
not want to discuss the loans because Applicant was still current on them. In June 2008, 
1 Tr. 9, 86-87. 
 
2 Tr.24-31, 85. 
 
3 Tr. 24. 
 
4 Tr. 22-24, 33. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant and his wife realized they could no longer afford the two properties. He 
contacted the lenders and advised them. He stopped paying the loans in June 2008. He 
did not make any other payments on either house after June 2008. The house in SOR ¶ 
1.e was foreclosed and sold in early 2009. The house in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d sold 
around the same time. Under State B law, Applicant is not obligated for any deficiency 
amount on the foreclosed properties.5 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e were 
resolved by legitimate legal means and Applicant does not owe any amounts on the 
debts.6  
 
Applicant and his wife realized they could not be totally dependent on the real 
estate market for their income. They moved to State C in July 2008, and Applicant 
changed professions. His wife remained a real estate agent. They lived with his wife’s 
parents until October 2009. Applicant remained unemployed until December 2008. His 
wife did not work after the birth of their son until about February 2009. She transferred 
her license to State C and is again selling real estate. The market is slowly rebounding 
and she has been able to earn an income. She is presently working with a real estate 
broker and earned $90,000 in 2009.7 Applicant estimates he earns about $60,000.8  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($99) was for a bill from Applicant’s residence in State B. 
He was unaware he owed the debt after he moved. He provided a forwarding address 
to the creditor, but he never received the bill. The bill is paid.9  
 
Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($142), but did not believe it was his debt. 
After researching the debt, he learned it was for a different address than where he lived. 
He believed somehow there was a mix-up when a previous tenant requested the utility 
services be transferred. He stated in his answer to the SOR: “After countless hours of 
discussion and finding no resolve, I have paid this bill.” He provided proof of payment.10 
 
Applicant’s vehicles are paid. He pays the complete balance on his credit card 
each month. He and his wife have savings in retirement accounts. He participates in his 
employer’s retirement program. They have substantial liquid capital to pay all of their 
monthly bills on time. They are being fiscally conservative and decided to rent a home 
instead of buying at this time. He has a budget that he maintains, which includes 
savings.11  
5 AE C. 
 
6 Tr. 22-24, 37-53. 
 
7 Tr. 53-56; AE G. 
 
8 Tr. 19. 
 
9 Answer to SOR, Exhibit A; AE N.  
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Tr. 60-75, 88; AE D, E, F, J, K, L.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant readily admits he made a conscious decision not to take a loan or 
withdraw the proceeds from his retirement accounts to pay the mortgages on the 
houses or any deficiency amount. He was aware that State B’s law protected him from 
having to pay the deficiency, and he determined it was the best plan because he and 
his wife were not earning incomes due to the real estate and economic crisis in the 
United States. He did not think it made good business sense to pay the mortgages on 
the depreciating property when he needed the money to provide for his family.12  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he was living within his means, but due to the real 
estate and economic crisis he was unable to work and pay his debts. He continues to 
live within his means and meet his obligations.13  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. The writers consider Applicant a trustworthy 
person. He exercises self-control and is conscientious in abiding by the rules. He is 
considered an honest man, with integrity who exercises good judgment. He is a hard 
worker.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
12 Tr.19-21, 72-82. 
 
13 Tr. 77-82. 
 
14 AE Q. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
Applicant was unable to meet his financial obligations when the nation’s real 
estate market and economy plummeted. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the 
above disqualifying condition.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s does not have any unpaid delinquent debts. His financial problems 
occurred under unique circumstances that affected the real estate market and the 
national economy. Applicant attempted to pay his mortgage payments for as long as 
possible, but when it became evident he could not pay them and support his family, he 
contacted his mortgage lenders. They were not willing to negotiate with him because he 
was not at the time delinquent on his loans. When he could no longer afford to pay the 
mortgages he stopped, but continued to pay his bills with his savings to provide for his 
family. He used the legal rules in State B that were available to him to minimize his 
debt. Under State B’s laws, he was not responsible for the deficiency on his foreclosed 
property. He and his wife decided it was too risky for both of them to continue to have 
jobs in the real estate industry. Applicant changed professions so he could have a more 
reliable income source, even if the real estate market was in a slump. This minimized 
their exposure to a turbulent real estate market and would prevent a repeat of the past. 
Applicant has a new job that does not rely on the real estate market. The conditions that 
caused the real estate market to collapse and affected their ability to earn the level of 
income they had in the past, was beyond Applicant’s control. Under the circumstances, 
he acted responsibly. He did not accumulate additional delinquent debts; he attempted 
to negotiate with the mortgage lenders, but was unsuccessful. He moved to a new state 
for different opportunities. He moved in with his in-laws to save money. He and his wife 
pay all of their expenses each month and they continue to live within their means. They 
both contribute regularly to retirement savings. Applicant paid the small debts that were 
included on his SOR, one which he disputed and the other that was never forwarded to 
him. The circumstances that caused Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to recur 
and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He 
acted responsibly when his financial problems became an issue. The problem is 
 
7 
 
 
resolved and there are clear indications that Applicant’s finances are stable. I find AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the Navy and 
was honorably discharged. After he and his wife had success in the real estate market, 
the national economy and real estate market began to plummet. Applicant found he 
could not afford the mortgages on the property he owned. He acted responsibly by 
contacting the mortgage lenders, who were unwilling to renegotiate the loans. Applicant 
chose to allow the properties to foreclose and use the legal procedures afforded by the 
state. Applicant changed professions so he would have a stable income in the event of 
a recurrence of a down market. He and his wife moved in with her parents so they could 
save money. They are both working and are being fiscally conservative. They pay their 
bills each month and have chosen to rent a home at this juncture. The record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant successfully mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
