 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04362 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Edward A. Blanchard, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on February 2, 2010, and reassigned to me on February 25, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on February 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
March 9, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, called three witnesses, and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 17, 2010.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 1988. She is seeking to retain a security clearance she has 
held since 1985. She has a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering awarded in 
1985. She was married from 1980 to 1986 and from 1990 to 1997. She married her 
current husband in 1997. She has three children, ages 18, 16, and 11.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $191,000. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s finances were stable until about 2004. A credit report from December 
2004 showed no delinquent accounts. She and her second husband shared custody of 
their two children, with neither having to pay child support. They split the expenses such 
as schooling and medical. Applicant, her current husband, and their child moved to 
another county in 2004. There were costs involved in the move, including unexpected 
repairs to their new home. Her second husband went back to court and used Applicant’s 
move to seek full custody of their children. After a costly legal battle, her second 
husband was awarded full custody of the two children, and Applicant was ordered to 
pay $1,667 per month in child support. She has visitation at her home on Thursdays 
and the first, third, and fifth weekends of each month. Applicant is also required to pay 
half the children’s medical expenses and education costs. Her second husband also 
obtained judgments against her for $4,610 and $6,000. The judgments are for attorney’s 
fees and education costs and are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o.2  
 
 Applicant’s current husband handled the family finances. He worked part-time 
and managed their rental properties, but mostly he was the primary caregiver for their 
child as a “stay-at-home dad.” In addition to their other financial issues, one rental 
property was severely damaged by a tenant, and some properties went without tenants 
for a period. He attempted to keep up by opening new accounts at low interest rates 
and transferring balances. However, he was late and missed payments, and the interest 
rates were raised to high levels. Applicant knew they were accumulating debt, but she 
was unaware of the scope of their debt until 2008, when she tried to charge a gasoline 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29-33, 48-50, 60; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-41, 50-59, 76, 104-111; GE 2, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
purchase and her card was denied. She went home, talked with her husband, and 
checked her credit report. Her debts were not delinquent at that time, but the balances 
were far higher than she realized. Several accounts were opened by her husband 
without her knowledge. Applicant reported her financial situation to her company’s 
security officer.3   
 
 Applicant and her husband followed the advice of several people and contracted 
with a law firm in September 2008 to assist in resolving their debts. The law firm told 
them to stop paying all their debts. They enrolled 14 of their debts, totaling about 
$174,500, in the law firm’s debt settlement program (DSP). The law firm charged an 
“engagement fee” equal to about 5.75% of the enrolled debt, which amounted to 
$10,330. There is a $78 per month fee for costs. Applicant and her husband agreed to 
send the company $1,518 each month to be used to settle their debts after the 
engagement fee was paid. The company would negotiate settlements with their 
creditors and pay the settlement out of the accrued funds. The company would receive 
an additional fee of 25% of the difference between the creditor’s claim and the amount 
the creditor agreed to accept as settlement of the debt. Applicant has continued in the 
program and settled a number of debts.4 
 
 Applicant has paid about $27,000 to the law firm since she contracted with the 
firm. She settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j ($895). She settled a $22,794 debt to a 
bank for $7,467. The SOR listed three debts to this bank. The DSP listed four debts to 
this bank. It is unclear whether this was one of the three debts to this bank alleged in 
the SOR or the fourth debt that was not alleged. She paid the law firm 25% on the 
amount saved by settling the debts. The creditor of the debt alleged in SOR 1.a 
($23,161) issued an IRS Form 1099-C in December 2009, cancelling a $19,306 debt. It 
is unclear if that figure represents the difference between the debt and a settlement on 
the debt or the creditor simply cancelled the debt without a settlement. The DSP lists all 
the debts alleged in the SOR except for the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o. 
Applicant intends to pay the judgments after her child support obligation ends. The child 
support obligation for her oldest child will end after the child graduates from high school 
this year. Her obligation should decrease about $200. She will have to pay for her 
second child for another three years.5 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. Her husband still manages the 
finances, but she monitors them to ensure they are being addressed. She admitted they 
were living beyond their means for a time. They were spending at a rate that did not 
take into account that she was paying a large amount each month in child support. They 
have since adjusted their standard of living to reflect their lower income. They are now 
living within their means and not acquiring new delinquent debt.6 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 41-46, 104-111; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE M. 
 
4 Tr. at 42-47, 79-83; GE 1, 2; AE A-E. 
 
5 Tr. at 40-41, 76-80; GE 2; AE A-I. 
 
6 Tr. at 66-72, 102, 109. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant did not want to file bankruptcy because she wanted to pay her debts. 
She did not consider Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which would have permitted her to pay her 
debts in a structured plan approved by the court and supervised by a trustee. Her 
brother is knowledgeable about these matters. She did not consult him before she 
contracted with the law firm. He feels she is paying exorbitant fees to the law firm that 
could have been used to pay her debts. She intends to continue to pay her debts, 
whether through the law firm or by using another option.7  
 
 Applicant is a valued and trusted employee as reflected in her performance 
appraisals and witnesses’ testimony. A co-worker and a friend both praised her integrity, 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 119-122. 
 
8 Tr. at 114-118; AE J. 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations She was admittedly living beyond her means. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant still has a number of delinquent debts. Her financial issues are current 
and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Except for some problems with her real estate properties, Applicant’s financial 
difficulties did not result from conditions that were outside her control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s husband managed the family finances, and she did not realize how 
much credit card debt they had accumulated until her credit card was rejected when she 
attempted to buy gas. Applicant has not received financial counseling, but she followed 
the advice of several people and contracted with a law firm in September 2008 to assist 
in resolving her debts. She has paid $1,518 each month since then to pay the law firm’s 
fees and settle her debts. Applicant credibly testified that she plans to continue paying 
her debts. In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal 
Board discussed an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that 
plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his [or her] outstanding indebtedness 
is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable 
 
7 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances; there are clear 
indications her financial problems are being resolved and are under control; and she 
has made a good-faith effort to repay her creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) is applicable to the 
debts in her payment plan, and 20(d) is applicable to the debts that have been paid.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also found Applicant to 
be honest and candid about her finances. I believe she is sincere about getting her 
finances in order. As indicated above, an applicant is not required to establish that she 
has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that she has established a plan to resolve her financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. I find that Applicant has established a plan to 
resolve her financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Her finances do not constitute a security concern. 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
