                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05655 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his part-time involvement with a Subchapter S 
corporation (R) on his security clearance application. He disclosed this involvement to 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator the next month before she 
could ask him any questions about his employment. He resigned from R in November 
2009, ending any potential conflict of interest. Security concerns under Guidelines E 
and L are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 3, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On December 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
and modified; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and L 
(outside activities). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On January 17, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. (HE 3) On February 17, 2010, Department 
Counsel announced she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On February 19, 
2010, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On March 11, 2010, DOHA issued a 
hearing notice. (HE 1) On April 8, 2010, Applicant’s hearing was held. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GE 1-2) (Tr. 17), and Applicant did not offer 
any documentary evidence. (Tr. 18) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-2. 
(Tr. 17) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and response to the SOR. (HE 
1-3) On April 15, 2010, I received the transcript.      
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
2.a with explanations. He admitted that he was an officer and shareholder of R; 
however, he denied that he was an employee of R. (HE 3 at 1) He admitted that he 
received taxable income as his portion of R’s profit; however, he denied this was salary. 
(HE 3 at 1) He knew when he completed his security clearance application he would be 
subsequently interviewed by an investigator, and he decided not to disclose his work on 
R’s behalf on his security clearance application. He planned to wait and disclose the 
information to the investigator, and did so on April 23, 2009. (HE 3 at 1-2) Other 
mitigating information in Applicant’s SOR response will be discussed, infra. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old program manager employed by a defense contractor 
(H).2 (Tr. 19) He has worked for H for 11 years. (Tr. 20) Applicant has a bachelor’s 
degree in civil engineering, and a master’s degree in environmental engineering. (Tr. 
20) He served on active duty for 10 years and received an honorable discharge from the 
Army in 2002 as a promotable captain. (Tr. 20; GE 1) He has been married for 15 years, 
and his spouse works on crafts, which she sells with his assistance as part of an import-
export business. (Tr. 21, 48-49) Applicant’s role in the craft business is to prepare the 
tax returns, provide manual labor, and work in her booth at craft shows. (Tr. 49) She 
does not pay Applicant a salary for working in her business. (Tr. 50) He has a 14-year-
old child. (Tr. 21) He has held a secret clearance since 1992. (Tr. 21) 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
2Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this section are from Applicant’s March 3, 2009, security 
clearance application. (GE 1) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s relationship with R 
 
Applicant was R’s President and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) as well as a 
member of R’s board of directors. (Tr. 12, 41; GE 2 at 5) About four other people formed 
the nucleus of R’s owners. (Tr. 36, 41; GE 2 at 5) The chairman of the board had the 
highest corporate position. (Tr. 41) Three members of the chairman of the board’s 
family were stock holders. (Tr. 41) At one point, Applicant’s father was a corporate 
officer and member of the board. (Tr. 37; GE 2)   
 
R is a corporate, management firm that worked for another government 
contractor and hired subcontractors to perform government work. (Tr. 22, 54) Applicant 
worked with R from 2006 until November 2009, when he resigned from R. (Tr. 12, 22; 
HE 3 at 5-7) His role at R was to provide technical oversight and ensure proper 
execution of a government contract. (Tr. 23) He did not sign contracts on behalf of R. 
(Tr. 54-55) He did not receive a salary or a W-2 from R. (Tr. 23) He did not have a 
written contract specifying what he was supposed to do at R. (Tr. 54) A certified public 
accountant (CPA), who is the cousin of the chairman of the board, set up R. (Tr. 23, 42) 
The CPA said R was so small that salaries and employees were unnecessary, and 
payments would be reported as a profit dividend or distribution on a K-1 form to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). (Tr. 23) Corporate officers received shares, and 
corporation profits were divided based on the number of shares owned. (Tr. 40-41) 
Applicant received 50,000 shares from R. (HE 3 at 6-7; GE 2) The total Applicant 
received from R over the period from 2006 to 2009 was between $125,000 and 
$175,000. (Tr. 39) 
 
Applicant’s work for R involved: discussions with one contractor about business 
opportunities, help writing one contract, management or monitoring compliance with the 
contract, and research using subcontractors relating to development of detection of 
explosive devices. (Tr. 27, 38, 43-44) His engineering contributions to R involved design 
of electrical and mechanical devices and development of new electronics. (Tr. 46) He 
worked for R from zero to 20 hours per week, and on average it was about two hours 
per week. (Tr. 47) None of R’s work was classified. (Tr. 38)3  
 
Applicant’s relationship with R’s other owners deteriorated in 2008, and at the 
end of 2008, Applicant began the process of resigning from R. (Tr. 24-25, 42) Applicant 
argued with the owners about profit sharing. (Tr. 25) He disagreed with the amount of 
effort others applied to the business. (Tr. 51) They lacked follow-on effort. (Tr. 51) 
Applicant was concerned about R’s IRS filings. (Tr. 51-52) He thought R made a profit 
in 2009, and R showed a loss on the form K-1s the corporation issued. (Tr. 52) He paid 
his own lawyer and CPA $7,000, and he challenged R’s assertion to the IRS on their 
 
3 Applicant’s counsel objected to consideration of the evidence that Applicant told the OPM 
investigator that he worked 20 hours per week for R. (Tr. 58-59) Department Counsel asked the question 
in good faith, as there was a basis for it in the summary of OPM interview. The record of the OPM 
interview is not part of the record, and Applicant’s counsel did not receive a copy of it until after 
Department Counsel asked the question. (Tr. 58-61) I find that Applicant worked for R from zero to 20 
hours per week, as he stated at the hearing, and I did not consider the contents of the OPM interview as 
impeachment of Applicant’s credibility.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
form K-1 of a loss. (Tr. 52-53) On November 20, 2009, he transferred the 50,000 shares 
he received back to R. (HE 3 at 6-7) When Applicant resigned from R, and he agreed 
not to communicate with any of R‘s subcontractors who are scientists. (Tr. 25) 
 
Applicant’s relationships to H, R, and his spouse’s export business  
 
Applicant provides business development for H, and has brought in many 
contracts for H. (Tr. 27) H’s work is primarily in consulting and engineering services. (Tr. 
27) Applicant provides technical advice to government program managers on directions 
for research. (Tr. 27) Applicant is a salaried employee; however, H bills Applicant’s 
hours to contracts. (Tr. 48) Applicant works more than 40 hours weekly for H. (Tr. 48) H 
is not involved in explosives detection engineering. (Tr. 28) 
 
Applicant informed H, his primary employer, of his work on his wife’s business. 
(Tr. 19, 50) He invited H’s employees to craft shows when they first started to generate 
business. (Tr. 50)  
 
Applicant’s handling of his relationship to R was different than his handling of his 
spouse’s craft business. He did not want his supervisors at H to know about or get 
involved with Applicant’s problems at R. (Tr. 26, 53; GE 2 at 6) None of the other 
officers at R worked for H. (Tr. 37)  
 
The President of H provided a January 17, 2010, letter stating Applicant 
described his role as President, CEO, member of the board, and shareholder of R. (HE 
3 at 4) Applicant also disclosed the scope of his employment with R to the President of 
H, and the President of H concluded there was no conflict of interest between 
Applicant’s employment at H and his work for R. (HE 3 at 4)   
 
Security clearance application 
 
On March 3, 2009, Applicant completed his most recent security clearance 
application. (Tr. 28-29; SF 86; GE 1) Section 13 seeks information about employment 
activities explaining: 
 
List all your employment activities, beginning with the present (#1) and 
working back 7 years (if an SSBI go back 10 years). You should list all full-
time and part-time work, paid or unpaid, consulting/contracting work, all 
military service duty locations, temporary military duty locations (TDY) 
over 90 days, self-employment, other paid work, and all periods of 
unemployment. The entire period must be accounted for without 
breaks. EXCEPTION: Do not list employments that occurred before your 
18th birthday unless it is necessary for providing a minimum of 2 years of 
employment history. (emphasis in original) (GE 1) 
 
The instructions also discuss providing employer verification information and disclosure 
of multiple employments with the same employer. (GE 1 at 14) In response to the 
requirement to provide employment information, Applicant disclosed that H employed 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
him from May 1999 to the present, and he provided contact information for H. (GE 1 at 
14-15) He did not disclose his work for his spouse on her craft business or his work for 
R. (GE 1) 
 
Applicant considered whether he should disclose his employment at R, and he 
decided to wait for the interview to disclose the information about R. (Tr. 29-30)4 He had 
completed security clearance forms and participated in background investigations and 
was well aware that the government followed up with an interview. (Tr. 30) Applicant did 
not seek advice from his security manager or anyone else before making the decision 
not to disclose his relationship with R on his security clearance application. (Tr. 30)  
 
Applicant’s security clearance application does not list any reportable incidents 
involving illegal drugs, alcohol, the police, or courts. (GE 1) There is no derogatory 
information about his financial history or abuse of information technology systems. (GE 
1) 
 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigative interview 
 
On April 23, 2009, Applicant had a meeting with an OPM investigator at his office 
at H. (Tr. 31, 56) The OPM investigator was reviewing Applicant’s security clearance 
application with Applicant. (Tr. 31) When the investigator arrived at the employment 
section, “before she even asked any questions I said I need to tell you this. . . . So I, 
before she even asked about [H,] I told her about [R], and I told her about my wife’s 
[craft] company.” (Tr. 31-32) He explained that R paid him under the Subchapter S of 
the IRS Code. (Tr. 32-33) He provided information to the OPM investigator about R’s 
corporate officers and stockholders, and his spouse’s craft business. (Tr. 33) There is 
no suggestion in the record that Applicant withheld any information from the OPM 
investigator or attempted to deceive the OPM investigator.  
 
The OPM investigator did not raise the subject of R. (Tr. 33-34) The only reason 
the investigator knew about his relationship with R was Applicant’s disclosure to the 
investigator. (Tr. 34) At the time of his OPM interview, H did not know about R. (Tr. 34) 
There is no evidence that OPM would have inevitably discovered the existence of 
Applicant’s relationship with R.5 
 
At the time he responded to DOHA interrogatories on October 28, 2009, he 
indicated he did not want H contacted about R, and he planned to end his association 
with R in the next 30 days. (Tr. 34-35; GE 2 at 6) He did not want H to communicate 
with R because he was in the midst of a disagreement with R. (Tr. 34) He did not agree 
 
4In Section 20B of security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that the U.S. Government 
paid him from September 2007 to the present to assist a foreign engineer in a research project in 
collaboration with some U.S. universities. (GE 1) In Section 20C, he also listed 13 foreign trips. (GE 1) 
 
5The government does not have a burden to show such information. See Policies section, infra, 
regarding burdens of proof.   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
with R’s business practices. (Tr. 35) He did not think H needed to know about R 
because there was no conflict of interest. (Tr. 34)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 
2009).   
   
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). The DOHA 
Appeal Board may reverse the administrative judge’s “decision to grant, deny, or revoke 
a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.” ISCR Case No. 07-
16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.).6 The 
federal courts generally limit appeals to whether or not the agency complied with its own 
regulations.   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and L (outside activities).  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
6See ISCR Case No. 09-03773 at 7 n. 4-6 (A.J. Jan. 29, 2010)(discussing appellate standards of 
review). 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;7 and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant admitted that he intentionally failed to disclose his relationship with R 
on his March 3, 2009, security clearance application (SOR ¶ 1.a). Section 13 of his 
security clearance application is written to capture all employment information, including 
non-salary work for a share of potential corporate profits. Even if the corporation lost 
money, and made no payments, Applicant’s investment in the corporation was labor, 
and he had to report the relationship with R on his security clearance application. AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(b) are established. Applicant did not disclose his relationship with R on his 
security clearance application because he did not want H to learn of that relationship. 
He also requested that DOHA not contact H about his relationship with R. AG ¶ 16(e) 
applies.    
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant deliberately and 
improperly failed to disclose his involvement with R on his March 3, 2009, security 
clearance application because he did not want H to know about his relationship with R. 
At the same time, he planned to disclose his relationship with R at the expected follow-
up investigative interview. In this way, he could fully discuss his relationship with R 
without H learning of it.  
 
An intentional omission allegation is not mitigated when an applicant admits the 
omission after an investigator tells him or her that the government has already learned 
facts establishing the omission.8 If an Applicant provides false information in multiple 
interviews, voluntary, accurate disclosure during the third interview does not mitigate the 
falsification concern.9 In ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007) the 
Appeal Board considered an applicant’s claim that he promptly disclosed his firing from 
employment to an investigator after falsely denying the termination from employment on 
his security clearance application stating: 
 
. . . Applicant did not disclose his termination from the hotel until he was at 
his security clearance interview. The . . . investigating agent asked about 
the hotel in the context of previous employments and Applicant indicated 
he worked there. The investigator then asked if anyone at the hotel would 
 
8ISCR Case No. 02-30369 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 04-00789 at 7 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006) (reversing grant of security clearance); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0557 at 4 (App. Bd. July 10, 2000) (reversing grant of security clearance).   
 
9ISCR Case No. 03-00577 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance).   
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
have anything negative to say about Applicant, at which time Applicant 
supplied the investigator with a name and the hotel management. 
Subsequently, Applicant informed the investigator that he had been fired 
from the hotel.  
 
The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007) affirmed 
the administrative judge’s decision not to credit applicant with making a “prompt, good 
faith [effort] to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Id. at 4-5. 
Stated differently, once it becomes apparent to an applicant that an investigator is likely 
to discover derogatory information, it is too late to receive mitigating credit under AG ¶ 
17(a). In the instant case, Applicant disclosed the omission concerning his employment 
with R before being confronted with any information that made it appear likely the 
investigator would discover that employment. He fully cooperated with the investigator’s 
follow-up interrogation.    
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) fully mitigates AG ¶ 16(e). Applicant attempted to conceal his 
relationship with R from his employer, H, raising a security concern. He ended his 
association with R, and disclosed his past relationship with R to H, mitigating this 
specific security concern.    
 
In sum, Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application by 
intentionally failing to disclose his relationship with R was improper and raised a security 
concern. He did not disclose this information because he wanted to conceal it from H, 
raising a separate personal conduct security concern. Fifty-one days after falsifying his 
security clearance application, in good-faith, he corrected the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts. In January 2010, after resigning his 
interest in R, he disclosed his involvement with R to H. Guideline E concerns are 
mitigated; however, assuming AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(e) are not applicable, security 
concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.  
 
Outside Activities 
 
AG ¶ 36 expresses the security concern pertaining to outside activities stating, 
“Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of security concern if 
it poses a conflict of interest with an individual's security responsibilities and could 
create an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of classified information.” 
 
AG ¶ 37(b) provides for one condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case stating, “failure to report or fully disclose an outside 
activity when this is required.”   
 
AG ¶ 37(b) applies because Applicant failed to disclose his activity on behalf of R 
on his security clearance application. Under AG ¶ 38(b), the concern about outside 
activities can be mitigated when “the individual terminated the employment or 
discontinued the activity upon being notified that it was in conflict with his or her security 
responsibilities.” I concur with Department Counsel’s concession that Applicant’s 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
outside activities are mitigated by his resignation from any involvement with R. (Tr. 10-
11, 13-14, 61) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and L in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
significant; however, they do not warrant revocation of his security clearance. 
Applicant’s failure to disclose his relationship with R on his security clearance 
application was imprudent, irresponsible, and improper. His intent was to conceal his 
relationship with R from H. This is not a valid reason for failing to disclose his 
relationship with R on his security clearance application.   
      
The rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. He was 
forthright and candid in his OPM interview, his response to DOHA interrogatories, his 
SOR response, and at his hearing about his failure to disclose his relationship with R, 
as well as his rationale for failing to provide this information.10 Applicant is 39 years old. 
He has a stable marriage of 14 years. He has successfully worked for the same 
employer for 11 years. From 2006 to November 2009, he was employed at R. He ended 
his relationship at R in part because he believed R was providing false income 
statements to the IRS. He spent $7,000 for an attorney and CPA to ensure he was not 
culpable for R’s attempts to defraud the IRS. His criticism of R’s improper conduct 
resulted in a strained relationship with R. He knew that if H contacted R, R’s employees 
would likely make negative comments about him to H. The President of H has been fully 
 
10ISCR Case No. 05-03554 at 4-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 23, 2007) (discussing factors an administrative 
judge should consider when making credibility determinations including consistency of statements). 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
informed of Applicant’s past relationship with R, and he stated, “this work was not and is 
not in conflict with the work [Applicant] performs” for H. (HE 3 at 4)  
 
Applicant has achieved some important educational and employment goals, 
demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. He earned bachelor and 
masters degrees. He served successfully on active duty in the Army, rising to the grade 
of promotable captain. He received an honorable discharge in 2002. Applicant is an 
intelligent person, and he understands that his failure to disclose his relationship with R 
on his security clearance was improper. He accepted that he showed poor judgment 
and regrets not consulting his security specialist. He has held a security clearance for 
many years without any other non-SOR allegations of misconduct. Applicant has 
demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and trustworthiness through his service to the Army 
as a commissioned officer and to the Department of Defense as a contractor. He is an 
asset to his employer. His security clearance application does not list any reportable 
incidents involving illegal drugs, alcohol, the police, or courts. There is no derogatory 
information about his financial history or abuse of information technology systems. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, my application of the 
pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and all the facts and circumstances in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns relating to personal conduct and outside activities. See Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). Applicant has mitigated or overcome the Government’s 
case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline L:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
