 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-00153 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On June 30, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant submitted an undated Answer to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
January 13, 2010, Department Counsel contacted Applicant to schedule a hearing. 
Applicant stated that she no longer wished to have a hearing and requested that an 
 
2 
 
 
administrative determination be made on the submitted record. On January 15, 2010, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 12 Items 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on January 20, 2010. Applicant received the 
FORM on February 11, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. She did not submit any additional information. On April 
21, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.h, 1.t, 1.y, 1.z, and 1.aa. Those admissions are incorporated into the 
following findings. She denied the remaining 19 allegations. She asserted that she 
successfully disputed the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.o, and 1.s. She claimed that she 
paid or resolved those alleged in ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.u, 
1.v, 1.w, and 1.x.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was divorced in 
1993. She has a 13-year-old daughter. Since June 2008, she has worked as an 
instrumentation mechanic for her current employer. (Item 5.) 
 
 In July 1999, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy that was discharged in 
November 1999. The record does not contain any information regarding the underlying 
reason that she filed the action or the amount of discharged debt. (Item 11.) On July 28, 
2004, she filed a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy as a result of an illness that prevented her from 
working from “the latter part of 2003 thru the first part of 2004.” (Item 5 at 35.) It was 
dismissed on April 18, 2006, because Applicant could no longer make the $382 monthly 
payments after she was seriously injured in a car accident in July 2005 and unable to 
work.1 (Item 5 at 33-35; Item 11.) 
 
 On May 7, 2009, Applicant submitted a Response to Interrogatories requesting 
information about 23 delinquent debts listed on an August 2008 credit bureau report 
(CBR.) She noted that “These accounts are in dispute. Currently with a credit repair 
program: ‘Dream Consulting Credit Repair.’” They are in the process of removing these 
accounts from my credit. What documentation will be acceptable to verify?” (Item .7) At 
least nine of those delinquent accounts were previously included in the Chapter 13 
Bankruptcy that was dismissed on April 2006. (Item 7; 11 at 39-40.) 
 
 Applicant attached a copy of her budget to that Response. Her net monthly 
income is $3,460 and expenses are $1,915. After making a $579 car payment on a loan 
balance of $21,680, she has approximately $965 remaining at the end of the month. 
(Item 7.) 
 
                                                          
1According to her e-QIP, Applicant was also involved in a car accident in January 2006 and in 
February 2008. She was at fault in the January 2006 accident and was hit by a drunk driver in February 
2008. (Item 5 at 37.) 
 
3 
 
 
 In September 2009, Applicant submitted a copy of a credit file investigation that 
seemingly referenced the disputes she filed in May 2009. She stated in her letter that 
“Most of the delinquent accounts have either been paid, incorrect, and/or disputed and 
have since been removed from my credit history/report. This can be verified with an 
updated credit report.” (Item 6.) She did not cross reference the findings of that 
document to the individual debts listed on the SOR or provide any explanation of its 
findings. She did not detail which debts were paid, which were incorrect, and which 
were disputed. She provided no other documents to specifically address the status of 
each delinquent debt 
 
 Applicant admitted that she has approximately $18,000 of delinquent debt. She 
did not provide evidence that she obtained financial counseling or established a 
repayment plan with any of the six creditors. Of the four debts that she claimed she 
successfully disputed, the record evidence documented that SOR ¶ 1.c remains unpaid 
as of the January 2010 CBR (Item 8.); SOR ¶ 1.o is paid (Item 9.); and, the status of the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and ¶ 1.s is unclear. The status of the majority of the 15 
debts that she asserted were paid or resolved also remains unsubstantiated, except ¶ 
1.n ($164) which is paid (Item 9.). For example, she asserted that the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($1,311), 1.k ($433), and 1.l ($249) are owed to the same credit card 
company and are resolved. (Item 4.) However, the January 2010 CBR noted that one 
account was paid in the amount of $253. (Item 8.) There is no evidence indicating that 
the other two accounts were settled along with that account. She did not provide any 
paid receipts or letters from creditors corroborating her assertions regarding the 
payment or resolution of most of the 19 individual debts.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence concerning the quality of her job performance. 
She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The evidence established security concerns under two Guideline F disqualifying 
conditions, specifically AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;@ and 
 
5 
 
 
AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on CBRs, two 
bankruptcies, and her admissions, Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling 
to satisfy debts dating back to 1999. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
five conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial issues. Under 
AG ¶ 20(a), a disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened 
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.@ Applicant experienced financial delinquencies in 1999, resulting in the 
filing of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In 2004, she filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy after she 
accrued additional delinquent debts. To-date she has between $18,000 and $28,000 of 
debt that remains unresolved. Because the ongoing problems are not isolated and there 
is no evidence to support a finding that delinquent indebtedness is unlikely to recur, the 
situation casts doubt on her reliability and this condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed her recent financial problems to a 2003 illness and 2005 car accident, which 
were conditions beyond her control. She submitted evidence that she attempted to 
resolve her indebtedness by filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2004 and complied with 
the payments until 2006. The record does not contain information regarding the specific 
steps she took subsequently to manage her debts. Hence, this mitigating condition has 
only partial application.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Because she did not submit evidence that she 
received credit counseling (other than a reference to some debt resolution company) or 
documentation that her financial problems are under control, AG ¶ 20(c) cannot apply. 
Although she asserted that she paid or resolved 19 debts, the evidence in the record 
does not support those assertions, except for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.o, and 
1.n. Hence, AG & 20(d) has limited application. 
 
Applicant provided evidence that she disputed debts in May 2009. However, the 
outcome of that dispute as it relates to the debts alleged in the SOR is not clear, 
especially as to those debts that were previously included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
repayment plan. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) that provides mitigation when “an individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
 
6 
 
 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issues” has limited application.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor for the past two years. In May 2009, she learned of 
the Government’s concerns relating to her delinquent debts and indicated that she was 
disputing them. In August 2009, the Government filed a SOR. On January 13, 2010, she 
notified Department Counsel that she no longer wanted a hearing in the matter. On 
January 15, 2010, the Government filed a FORM and specifically notified her that she 
failed to provide documentation supporting her assertions regarding the resolution of 19 
debts. Despite that notification, she did not submit additional information to substantiate 
her claims as to those debts. Nor did she present any evidence indicating that she was 
addressing the $18,000 of delinquent debt that she acknowledged. Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to document the establishment of a track record of financial 
responsibility or resolution, which would prevent a recurrence or continuance of similar 
problems in the future. The record contains insufficient evidence about her character, 
trustworthiness, or reliability to further mitigate these concerns or make their 
continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o:       For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p through 1.aa:                 Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
