1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-02496
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I  deny
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
Applicant signed his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 5, 2008. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal
Conduct) on November 30, 2009. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
AE H is the first 12 pages of a 25 page credit report dated March 29, 2010. The relevant information from this1
credit report has been submitted.
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 5; Response to FORM.3
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 14, 2009. He
submitted a notarized, written response to the SOR allegations on January 12, 2010,
and requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on March 1, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on March 9,
2010. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response and additional evidence
on March 29, 2010. DOHA assigned this case to me on April 23, 2010. The Government
submitted ten exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-10 and admitted into the
record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 4, and
the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His response to the FORM and attachments are
admitted into the record as Applicant exhibits, AE A through H.1
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b-
1.dd, 2.a, 2.b, and 3.a of the SOR, with explanations. His admissions are incorporated
herein as findings of fact. He denied the factual and security concern allegations in ¶¶ 1,
1.a, 2, and 3 of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to support his request2
for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 36 years old, works as an instrumentation mechanic for a
Department of Defense contractor. He began this position in August 2008. Applicant
served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from 1997 until 2002 and in the
Marine Corps reserves from 2002 until 2005, when he was honorably discharged. While
in the Marine Corps, he held a secret clearance without incident. Applicant married in
2000. He has three children, ages 12, 11, and 8.3
Applicant’s August 2009 personal financial statement reflects that he earns
$3,865 a month in gross income, and he receives $123 a month in veteran’s disability
Item 6.4
Item 8 (Credit report, dated August 28, 2009); Item 9 (Credit report, dated April 1, 2009); Item 10 (Credit5
report, dated December 30, 2008); AE H (Credit report, dated March 29, 2010).
Id.; AE A; AE B; AE F.6
Items 8-10; AE G; AE H.7
3
benefits, for a total gross monthly income of $3,988. His net monthly income totals
$3,733. His monthly expenses $2,434, leaving a net remainder of $1,299.4
The credit reports dated December 30, 2008, April 1, 2009, August 28, 2009,
March 29, 2010, and the SOR indicate that Applicant has $40,339 in unpaid debts owed
to 28 creditors. The record reflects that Applicant paid some debts and disputed other
debts. He also continues to owe money on several debts. After a careful review of all
the evidence of record, I make the following findings regarding the status of Applicant’s
debts listed in the SOR.5
Applicant paid and verified payment of these two SOR debts: 1.a (credit card
debt of $210; AE A, AE B) and 1.q (cable $315, AE F). In his personal interview and
response to the FORM (AE G), Applicant stated that he paid the debts in SOR
allegations 1.d (medical $60); 1.e (medical $91); 1.i (check $77); 1.j (credit account
$250); 1.n (credit union $69); 1.o (bank account $2,234); 1.p (medical $63); 1.r (bank
credit card $572); 1.t (medical $55); and 1.bb (bank account $232). He did not provided
documentation which verified his statements that he paid these debts.6
The August 28, 2009, April 1, 2009, and March 29, 2010 credit reports indicate
that Applicant disputed the following SOR debts: 1.g (telephone bill $1,605); 1.h (bank
debt $497, paid $50); 1.j (credit account $250); 1.k (utility account $225); 1.l and 1.u
(same account, all-terrain vehicle $5,012 and $5,082); 1.y (education loan $3,260); and
1.y (telephone bill $446). The credit reporting company removed the accounts in SOR
allegations 1.k ($225), 1.l and 1.u ($5,015 and $5,082), 1.r ($572), and 1.y ($446),
following Applicant’s dispute. The reason for the removal of these debts is unknown. In
his interview, Applicant stated that he paid the debt listed in SOR allegation 1.z
($7,872), and this debt has been removed from Applicant’s credit reports for unknown
reasons. The debt listed in SOR allegations 1.v (automobile loan $2,433) and 1.aa
(credit account $5,910) are not listed on any credit report, leaving Applicant without the
ability to contact a creditor to verify the debt or pay it. Applicant admitted owing these
debts in his response to the SOR; however, in his response to the FORM materials, he
indicated that these debts had been removed from his credit report. He did not state that
he paid the debts nor did he verify that the debts have been removed because he
disputed the legitimacy of the debt.7
Items 8-10; AE C-AE E.8
Item 6.9
Item 7; Response to FORM.10
Response to FORM; Response to SOR; Item 7.11
Item 6.12
4
Applicant provided evidence showing that he paid several bank account debts.
He did not show how these payments related to debts listed in the SOR. The account
numbers do not match the account information on the credit reports for these creditors.8
Applicant indicated that he retained the services of a debt counseling company.
He did not provide a copy of the contract, a list of the debts managed by this company,
and verification of his payments to the company or verification of debts paid by the
company.  9
Applicant advised the security investigator that his financial problems began after
his discharge from the Marine Corps. He did not obtain employment immediately, and
when he did find employment, his salary was insufficient to pay his regular monthly
expenses. His current position provides a better income.10
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant answered “no” to the following
questions: 
Section 28: Your Financial Delinquencies
a.  In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any      
debt(s)? 
b.  Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits that he falsified his answers to
these questions. However, in his response to interrogatories he denies intentionally
falsifying his answers to these questions, stating that he did not list his debts because
the debts had been charged off. He did not consider accounts “charged off” to equate to
debts over 180 days delinquent. His regular monthly bills were current. Because he
previously held a security clearance, Applicant had completed at least one security
clearance application in the past.11
SOR allegations 1.cc and 1.dd under the financial considerations guideline relate
to two criminal allegations against Applicant for theft by check for less than $500.
Applicant reimbursed the individuals for the amount of the check. As a result, criminal
charges were not filed.    12
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all relevant,
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”
6
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts, which he was unable to pay
for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), mitigation may occur when
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial problems
arose in 2005 and have continued. This mitigating condition does not apply. 
AG & 20(b) mitigation applies where Athe conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s financial problems
arose after his discharge from the Marine Corps in 2005. It took him three months to
find employment. When he did, his salary was less than he earned in the military and
provided sufficient funds each month to pay basic living expenses, but not his overdue
debts. This mitigating condition is partially applicable in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant indicated that he retained the
services of a debt counseling company, but did not provide any information about this
company or the services it provided to him. Applicant admitted the debts in SOR
allegations 1.aa and 1.bb. However, allegation 1.aa is not listed in any of the four credit
reports of record, leaving Applicant without any means to pay this debt. The information
Applicant provided showing payments on bank account debts may relate to the debt in
allegation 1.bb, but the evidence is not clear that it does. Applicant resolved some of his
overdue debt; nonetheless, many debts remain unresolved. The record is insufficient to
7
show that Applicant’s finances are under control. This mitigating condition has some
applicability.
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant
provided proof that he paid two bills listed in the SOR. He believes several other bills
are paid, but the record lacks evidence which shows that he paid these bills. This
mitigating condition applies to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.q.
Finally, under AG ¶ 20(e), security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual
has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause
of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” The credit reports of record
indicate that Applicant disputed eight debts listed in the SOR because the debts were
not his or he had paid the debt. As a result of his dispute, the debts in SOR allegations
1.k, 1.l, 1.u, and 1.y have been removed from his credit report. Applicant indicated that
he disputed the debt in SOR allegations 1.j and 1.r. because he had paid the debts.
Allegation 1.r is no longer on his credit reports, but allegation 1.j is listed on his most
recent credit report as verified. This mitigating condition applies to the SOR debts in
allegations 1.k, 1.l, 1.r, 1.u, and 1.y.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16(a) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and (e)
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1)
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal,
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country,
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313313
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
8
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or
other group;
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission, concealment or falsification in her
answer must be deliberate. The Government established that Applicant omitted a
material facts from his e-QIP when he answered “no” to Questions 28a, about debts
over 180 days delinquent, and 28b, about debts currently 90 days overdue. This
information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security
clearance and to his honesty. Although he admitted the allegations, he now denies that
he had an intent to hide this information from the Government, arguing that he did not
believe his charged-off debts would be considered as 180 days delinquent or more.
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the burden of
proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the
omission occurred.13
When he completed his e-QIP in November 2008 and answered question 28a,
Applicant knew he had unpaid debts from the past. He paid his current bills, thus, he did
not have any current bills more than 90 days overdue. His failure to answer “yes”
question 28a when he knew about his old debts shows an intent to hide information
from the Government. However, since he paid his monthly expenses and bills, he did
not intentionally falsify his answer to question 28b. This question seeks information
about debts which are more than 90 days old, but less than 180 days old. The debts in
this case are more than 180 days old. The Government established intentional
falsification under allegation 2.a, but did not establish intentional falsification of
allegation 2.b, which is found in Applicant’s favor.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
9
The Government alleges that Applicant violated federal law when he falsified his
answers to Section 28 of the e-QIP. Since I found that Applicant intentionally falsified
his answer to question 28a, the Government has established its case under AG ¶ 31(c).
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement; and,
(e) potentially disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) above, may not be
mitigated unless, where meritorious circumstances exist, the Secretaries
of the Military Departments or designee; or the Directors of Washington
Headquarters Services (WHS), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),
National Security Agency (NSA), Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) or designee, has granted a waiver.
I have reviewed the mitigating conditions with the facts of this case and find that
none of them apply. Applicant has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns
under Guideline J.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
10
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or deny a
security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both favorable and
unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the evidence of record,
not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is established and then
whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a
reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems first
began after his discharge from the Marine Corps. He encountered difficulty obtaining
immediate employment, making it difficult to pay all his monthly expenses. When he
finally obtain employment, he earned less than his military income, which did not allow
him to catch up on his overdue bills. Since he began his current job, Applicant has
resolved some of his overdue debts either by payment or challenging the validity of the
debts.
Applicant failed to provide documentation to show he has resolved all debts he
said were resolved. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish that his finances
are under control. Most importantly, because he asked for a decision on the record and
not a hearing, his credibility cannot be evaluated. Thus, the validity of his reason for
answering “no” to question 28a could not be assessed. Because he had previously
completed security clearance applications, he understood the need to be truthful in his
answers. His explanation for his “no” answer is not rational or reasonable, as not all his
debts had been charged off.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances, personal
conduct and criminal conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b-1.j: Against Applicant
11
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m-1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s-1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v-1.x: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.z: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.aa: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.bb: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.cc: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.dd: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against  Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
