                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05065 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On January 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 1, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 17, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on April 12, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness testified on 
his behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, and they were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 2.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He has a son who is almost two years old. He and his 
fiancée, the mother of his son, have lived together for approximately six years. He has 
financially supported his fiancé during this period. She has been employed since 
October 2009. Prior to then she did not work. Applicant’s aunt took care of him when he 
was growing up. He graduated from high school in 2003. He anticipates being awarded 
his associate’s degree in June 2010. He previously held a security clearance in 2005, 
while working for a former employer. He has been working for his present employer 
since June 2009.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested on May 25, 2006, and charged with Deliver Drugs to 
Prisoner, a felony. Applicant stated, “I knew that if I get the felony, that I can kiss my 
clearance good-bye.”2 On December 12, 2006, he pleaded guilty to an amended charge 
of Obstruction of Justice, a misdemeanor, and was sentenced to 12 months in jail, a 
$1,000 fine, $380 in court costs, and one year of supervised probation. He served 72 
days in jail and performed 100 hours of community service. He stated he was released 
from probation early due to his community service.3 
 
 Applicant admitted to arranging three-way telephone calls for his cousin who was 
serving four years in prison for drug offenses. He was aware this was a prohibited 
practice by the prison. At his hearing, he confirmed that through the calls his cousin was 
making arrangements to get drugs in the prison. Applicant stated he suspected that his 
cousin was arranging drug transactions. He admitted to arranging “about five calls.” 
Applicant held a security clearance when he was arranging these calls for his 
imprisoned cousin. He knew he could not be involved in drugs with a security 
clearance.4  
 
 In approximately September 2007, Applicant was released from supervised 
probation. On April 15, 2008, while working for a federal contractor, Applicant was 
1 Tr. 20, 31-34, 107-108. 
 
2 Tr. 49. 
 
3 Tr. 46. 
 
4 Tr. 63-71. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
arrested and charged with two counts of Indecent Exposure. On June 16, 2008, at a 
contested bench trial, Applicant was found guilty of both counts. He appealed the 
conviction, and it was overturned on a procedural error. On March 3, 2009, he accepted 
a plea agreement to plead guilty to Obscene Display, a misdemeanor. He was 
sentenced to serve 90 days in jail, all of which was suspended. He was required to pay 
$141 in court costs, and was on unsupervised probation for one year.5  
 
 Applicant maintains his innocence of exposing himself on April 15, 2008, despite 
his guilty plea. He stated he was making deliveries at a federal building. Two female 
custodians identified Applicant and testified at his trial that he exposed himself. He had 
never met these women and did not know them. He had no idea why they would accuse 
him of the offense. He stated “I did have something wrong with my buckle [on] my pants 
that day. . . .”6 Applicant hired an attorney and was represented by counsel throughout 
the trial, appellate proceedings, plea negotiations, and guilty plea. His lawyer had an 
opportunity to cross examine the witnesses and presented a defense. Applicant 
admitted that after his appeal, he accepted a plea agreement and he pleaded guilty to 
the misdemeanor Obscene Display. In his response to interrogatories, dated August 31, 
2009, he stated: “In the second case I was able to get a nice plea and I took it because I 
was afraid I would lose again.”7 Applicant’s unsupervised probation ended in March 
2010.8  
 
 Applicant’s employer, at the time of his April 2008 arrest, initially waited for the 
disposition of Applicant’s case before addressing his employment status. Applicant 
stated the reason his employment was terminated was because his employer did not 
want to wait four months after his plea, to learn what Applicant’s sentence would be. 
Applicant then admitted he was fired from the job because he pleaded guilty to the 
Obscene Display charge.9  
 
 Applicant admitted he was terminated from a job in October 2008, after he had 
an argument with a supervisor and used profanity.10  
 
 Applicant was proud of the fact he held a security clearance and would tell 
people that he had one. He believed it would “help him out” and was a reflection of his 
good character. He stated: 
 
5 Tr. 34-46, 70. 
 
6 Tr. 40. 
 
7 GE 8. 
 
8 Tr. 40-46, 70-83. 
 
9 Tr. 44-46, 84-86. 
 
10 Tr. 85-87. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
I work with all types of outstanding people. So it happened, even when I 
got in trouble on these two particular incidents, you know, when I tell 
people I have a clearance they think it’s outstanding. I know a lot of people 
judge me by it. I really think that it has helped me out in my court 
situations. It’s brought me a long way to take care of myself.11 
 
Applicant further stated the following:  
 
A lot of people don’t know what a security clearance is. It’s quite natural. I 
mean I don’t have any skills. Quite naturally it has brought me my living, 
and I just like to share that with people, let [them] know about a clearance 
situation, because you know, it’s a nice thing to have. I’d like to let people 
know that, you know, I’m a good person and I’m affiliated with the 
government, and I do a good job. I like representing the government.12 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant paid the 
medical debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 3.c, 3.d, and 3.e. He paid them in January 2010 with his 
tax refund.13  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 3.a is for a broken lease for an apartment. Applicant lost his 
job and could not pay the rent. He stated the total amount of the debt is approximately 
$4,100. He stated he has been paying $125 towards the debt since May 2009.14  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.b ($424) is a medical debt that is approximately three years 
old. It is not paid.15  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.f ($904) is for telephone services. The debt is approximately 
two and a half years old. It is unpaid.16 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.g ($285) is a medical account that is approximately two and 
a half years old and it is unpaid.17 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.h ($5,108) is a credit card debt. Applicant obtained the 
credit card in approximately 2006, and it became delinquent sometime in 2007. He used 
11 Tr. 56. 
 
12 Tr. 83. 
 
13 Tr. 62, 90-91; AE A. 
 
14 Tr. 59, 87-89. 
 
15 Tr. 89-90. 
 
16 Tr. 91-93. 
 
17 Tr. 94-96. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
the credit card to fix his car and obtain an apartment. He has contacted the creditor and 
advised them they will have to wait for his payments. The debt is unpaid.18  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.i ($274) is for telephone services. The account was 
approximately two years old. Applicant settled the account in March 2010 for $119.19 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.j ($1,105) is for telephone services. Applicant stated these 
charges were for collect calls he incurred while he was incarcerated for 72 days, serving 
the sentence for Obstruction of Justice. The debt has been owed since 2007 and is 
unpaid.20  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.k ($2,819) is for a car loan through a credit union. Applicant 
stopped paying the monthly amount due in approximately June 2008, when he lost his 
job. He did not pay the loan for three to four months. He stated the loan has since been 
charged-off by the creditor. He stated he is making monthly payments of $50 on the 
loan.21 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 3.l ($1,319) was for a personal loan from a credit union. He 
stopped paying the loan in June 2008, when he lost his job. He stated he is making 
monthly payments of $50 on the loan.22  
 
 Applicant stated he plans on paying his delinquent debts in “due time before this 
year is out.”23 He has a $1,200 judgment awarded to him in April 2009, but has been 
unable to collect it. He also anticipates suing an apartment complex on a civil matter 
and hopes to obtain a judgment. He plans on using the money from the first judgment, 
when he collects it, to help pay his delinquent debts. He also intends on using the 
money from a potential second judgment to pay his debts.24  
 
 Applicant’s fiancée testified on his behalf. She believes Applicant has overcome 
his mistakes. He has always been a good provider to both her and their son. No one in 
his family provides him financial support. Regarding his conviction for Obstruction of 
Justice, she stated he did the wrong thing at the wrong time, and he was just helping his 
cousin out. She said Applicant told her he was not in his right state of mind when the 
offenses occurred and he was not thinking straight. He learned his lesson from that 
18 Tr. 96-98. 
 
19 Tr. 60-61; AE B. 
 
20 Tr. 98-100. 
 
21 Tr. 100-102. 
 
22 Tr. 102-105. 
 
23 Tr. 109. 
 
24 Tr. 28-30, 125-137. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
experience. Regarding the Obscene Display offense, she was shocked to learn of it, 
and does not believe he committed the offense. She feels they are both on track with 
their lives.25  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from his aunt. She wrote that he has 
matured and she has noticed a positive change in his life. He has become very 
responsible since the birth of his son. She wrote about the hardships Applicant faced as 
a child, yet he stayed in school and received his high school diploma. He is a hard 
worker. She explained he did not always make the right choices and decisions, but he is 
resilient and has a positive attitude in becoming a law-abiding and honest young man.26 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
25 Tr. 110. 
 
26 AE D. 
 
7 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was arrested on May 25, 2006 and charged with Deliver Drugs to 
Prisoner, a felony. He pled guilty to an amended charge of Obstruction of Justice. He 
was sentenced to 12 months in jail and served 72 days. He was on supervised 
probation. On April 15, 2008, he was arrested and charged with two counts of Indecent 
Exposure. He was found guilty of the offenses and appealed the conviction. Following 
the appeal, he pled guilty to Obscene Display, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 90 
days in jail, all of it was suspended, and one year of unsupervised probation. I find both 
of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
8 
 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant committed a serious offense by helping his cousin coordinate drug 
sales from prison. He was aware of what was happening and assisted his cousin on five 
separate occasions. He held a security clearance at the time he committed these 
offenses. A few months after his probation expired he was arrested for Indecent 
Exposure. He contested the charge at a bench trial. His lawyer had an opportunity to 
cross examine witnesses and conduct a defense. Applicant was convicted, appealed, 
and the conviction was overturned on a procedural error. The State chose to retry him 
and he accepted a plea agreement. He pled guilty to Obscene Display. Applicant 
professed his innocence at the hearing. There is no evidence Applicant was not 
afforded proper due process during the proceedings and at his trial. He hired an 
attorney who contested the first set of charges. Later, his attorney represented him 
when he chose to plead guilty. Applicant was released from probation in March 2010. I 
find not enough time has elapsed since Applicant’s last criminal offense to conclude 
further misconduct is unlikely to recur. I also find Applicant’s criminal conduct in helping 
his cousin facilitate drug deals while a prisoner and while Applicant held a security 
clearance raises serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I find there is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant committed all of the 
offenses alleged. Applicant has continued to pursue his education and is taking care of 
his family. However, because of the seriousness of Applicant’s criminal conduct and the 
fact his latest offenses occurred shortly after being released from his first probation, I 
find there is not enough evidence to conclude he is successfully rehabilitated. I find 
none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
I have considered all of the personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
16 and especially considering the following: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant was terminated from two jobs. One was due to his criminal conviction 
and the other was due to arguing with his supervisor and using profanity. I find the 
above disqualifying condition applies.  
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and especially considered:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant was proud of the fact he held a security clearance and wanted people 
to know it because he believed it showed he was trusted. He committed a serious 
offense while holding a security clearance. He was terminated from his job after his 
conviction. I have more thoroughly addressed and analyzed this issue under the 
criminal conduct guideline, which deals with the underlying reason for his termination. I 
also conclude that the incident raises questions about his personal conduct.  
Applicant was also terminated from another job in October 2008 because of his 
conduct. I find this type of conduct reflects on his personal, professional, and community 
standing, and could create a vulnerability to exploitation and manipulation. Applicant did 
not provide sufficient evidence to convince me that the circumstances were unique or 
unlikely to recur. His actions cast doubt on his good judgment. There is no evidence he 
acknowledged the behavior and sought counseling. I am not convinced that the 
inappropriate behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant did not provide information of the 
positive steps he has taken to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress. Applicant did show that he is caring for his son and his fiancée. 
He continues to go to school and expects to earn his associate’s degree in a couple of 
months. These are positive factors, but based on all of the information, there is not 
enough evidence to overcome the disqualifying information. I find none of the above 
mitigating conditions apply.  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:   
 
 
10 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has unpaid and unresolved delinquent debts. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Appellant has nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $12,000. He stated he 
is making small payments on a couple of debts, but no documentary proof was 
 
11 
 
 
provided. He paid three medical debts and one phone bill. He does not have a realistic 
plan for resolving his delinquent debts. He hopes to file a civil lawsuit and obtain a 
judgment on a claim he has and then use that money to help pay his delinquent debts. 
He has a valid judgment on another claim, but has not received the money. He is 
hoping to get the money from that judgment to pay his debts. Applicant has not 
formulated a realistic, viable, practical plan for paying his creditors. His debts are 
current and unpaid. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Some of his 
debts became delinquent because he was in jail or paying for a lawyer due to his 
criminal conduct. These matters were not beyond his control. I find AG ¶ 17(b) does not 
apply. There is no evidence he has received financial counseling or there is a clear 
indication the problem is being resolved. Hence, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. He has 
paid four delinquent debts, so AG ¶ 17(d) is partially applicable. There is no evidence 
he disputes any of the debts. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant graduated high school and 
anticipates earning his associate’s degree in a couple of months. He is taking care of 
his fiancée and his son. Applicant committed a serious criminal offense when he helped 
his incarcerated cousin facilitate drug transactions, from prison. Applicant held a 
security clearance when he committed this criminal conduct. Shortly after he was 
released from probation, he again committed a criminal offense. Applicant’s criminal 
activity impacted his financial situation. He hired an attorney which impacted his 
finances and he could not pay his bills when he was in jail. Applicant appears to be 
trying to move beyond his past and put his life in the right direction to take care of his 
family. However, his criminal conduct occurred while he was entrusted with a security 
clearance and he abused that privilege. His finances remain an issue because he has 
 
12 
 
 
not yet addressed all of his delinquent debts. The record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guidelines for Criminal Conduct, Personal Conduct, and 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   3.b:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 3.c-3.e:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   3.f-3.h:   Against Applicant  
 Subparagraph   3.i:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 3.j-3.l:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
