                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03809 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s undated answer was received by DOHA on December 7, 2009. In it 
he requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on March 12, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 17, 2010. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on April 15, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 9. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
testified on his behalf. Applicant did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in 1991, and attended 
college, but did not receive a degree. He has never been married. He has a six-year-old 
daughter, who lives with her maternal grandmother. He does not pay child support 
because the mother has never sought court-ordered support. He stated his means of 
support for his child is by occasionally providing things that the child needs. He has had 
no periods of unemployment. He has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, for approximately four-and-a-half years.1  
 
 Applicant admitted he owes all of the debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
approximately $64,691. The delinquent debts date back to 2003. Applicant also 
admitted he has not paid any of the delinquent debts.2 In his interview with an Office of 
Personnel Management investigator (OPM) in 2008, he stated he was negotiating 
settlements with some creditors and was working out payment plans. He did not follow 
through and arrange any payment plans or make any payments.  
 
 The largest of Applicant’s debts is listed in SOR 1.g ($51,842) for a loan he 
obtained with his girlfriend to purchase a house in 2006. Applicant explained that when 
he and his girlfriend were in the process of buying a house, she was helping him pay his 
bills and clear up his credit. She was handling the finances. He admitted he signed the 
documents to buy the house. The couple had a disagreement in August 2008, and 
Applicant moved out of the house. He began experiencing financial problems because 
he had to find a new place to live. He explained that because he no longer lived in the 
house, he no longer had to pay the mortgage. He stated that his ex-girlfriend told him 
not to worry about it. He contacted the mortgage company to find out how to remove his 
name from the mortgage and was advised the loan would have to be refinanced. His ex-
girlfriend advised him that she could not afford to refinance the loan. Apparently, 
sometime later they defaulted on the loan. Applicant stated once he left the house in 
August 2008, he did not pay any of the bills associated with it. He took possession of a 
car and a truck when he left.3 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($900) and 1.c ($6,023) are student loans. Applicant 
stated he received forbearance from the creditors on these loans until November 2010. 
He did not provide any documentary proof to show the debts are in forbearance. The 
1 Tr. 20-25. 
 
2 Tr. 46. 
 
3 Tr. 42-53. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was incurred in either 2004 or 2005. Applicant has not made any 
payments on the debt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was incurred in 2007. He has not made 
any payments on the debt. Applicant stated he did not complete any paperwork to 
request the forbearance. He stated he intends on paying the debt in November when 
the forbearance expires.4 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not recognize the debt or the creditor for the debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.b ($59). He stated he intended to dispute the debt. He then stated he 
had sent a letter to the creditor in 2007. He was presented with a copy of his interview 
with OPM from July 2008, during which he explained he was overwhelmed with debt 
and did not know who the creditor was. He intended to obtain a copy of his credit report 
and confirm those accounts which he believed were his  and to write letters to dispute 
others and have them removed from his credit report. Applicant’s testimony was 
inconsistent. The debt is unpaid.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($476) is a medical debt that Applicant stated he agreed 
to pay for the mother of his daughter. The debt was incurred in 2004. It is not paid.6  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($350) and 1.f ($205) are for telephone services. 
Applicant has not paid the debts.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,939) is the amount owed to a bank after Applicant 
cashed a fraudulent check. He received the check in the mail for $1,000. He was told 
that in order for him to cash the check he was required to send $250 to the party that 
sent him the check. He stated that he believed it was a legitimate check and sent the 
money. He had no idea why he received the check for $1,000. Applicant has not 
reimbursed the bank that cashed the check for him. In his answer to interrogatories 
dated August 31, 2009, he stated he would make payments of $25 every two weeks. He 
did not make any payments. He explained: “I meant I was going to pay everything like I 
said, but every time I be ready to pay something, I always take a step backwards. I 
always be ahead, and then something always comes up.”8 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($660) and 1.m ($344) are payday loans. Applicant 
believes they date back to 2004 or 2005. He has not paid them.9  
 
4 Tr. 25-34, 58-60. 
 
5 Tr. 34- 42; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 88-90. 
 
7 Tr. 90. 
 
8 Tr. 61, 82-87. 
 
9 Tr. 91, 97, 102-103, GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($643) is for telephone services. Applicant stated that his 
sister obtained an account in his name. He became aware of the account later and his 
sister agreed to pay the debt, but did not. Applicant did not report the account was 
opened without his permission. He did not dispute the account with the creditor. The 
account is not paid.10  
 
 Applicant does not recognize the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.k ($475) He has not 
contacted, disputed or attempted to resolve the debt.11  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant initially stated he did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l 
($395). In answers to interrogatories dated August 31, 2009, he acknowledged the debt 
and stated he was waiting for a settlement letter from the creditor. He stated he had no 
means to pay the debt because he did not have a credit card or a savings or checking 
account and the creditor would not accept a money order. Applicant has not pursued 
resolving the debt and it remains unpaid.12  
 
 Applicant believes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($308) is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.j. He 
did not provide any proof or rationale for his position. The debt is unpaid.13  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($72) is for a savings account that was overdrawn. 
Applicant stated the bank advised him he could consolidate this debt with the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant has not consolidated or paid the debt.14  
 
 Applicant stated that he has recently “freed up” $1,000 to use to pay his debts. 
He has not paid any to date, but was going to meet with some of his creditors after his 
hearing. He recently obtained a credit report, but had not reviewed it. He explained that 
he has been going through a rough time because his daughter needed some care and 
he had to arrange for her to live with her grandmother. He recently transferred one of 
his cars to his cousin, who will assume the payments.15  
 
 Applicant does not have any money in the bank. He has approximately $18,000 
in his retirement account. He stated that a number of years ago he obtained a loan from 
the account. When asked why he did not obtain a loan to resolve some of his debts, he 
indicated that he did not know how. He further stated that in 2008 he contacted a debt 
10 Tr. 91-92. 
 
11 Tr. 92. 
 
12 Tr. 56-57, 92-96; GE 4. 
 
13 Tr. 98. 
 
14 Tr. 98-101. 
 
15 Tr.44-45, 53. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
counselor but could not afford their plan. When asked if he had a budget, he stated: I 
haven’t put it together yet.” He went on to say that he is working on making a budget.16 
 
 Applicant’s wages are being garnished for federal taxes owed from 1998, 1999, 
2000, 2002, and 2006. He owes approximately $1,000 for his 2009 federal income tax, 
but is unable to pay it. He does not know how he will pay his 2009 federal income 
taxes.17  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He stated Applicant is a reliable 
worker. He recently received a pay raise because of his performance. He has a good 
worth ethic, is honest, and trustworthy. His supervisor was willing to work with Applicant 
and help him with understanding his finances.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
16 Tr. 55-56, 67, 87-88, 103-104. 
 
17 Tr. 75-82, 103; GE 2; I have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but have 
considered it when analyzing the whole-person and Applicant financial status. 
 
18 Tr. 70-75. 
 
6 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a history of being unwilling or unable to meet his financial 
obligations since 2004. He has many debts that remain unpaid and delinquent. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because his delinquent debts remain unpaid. He 
has not paid any of them nor has he contacted his creditors to resolve them. He does 
not have a plan to pay them. He did not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that his 
financial problems are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s largest debt is a defaulted mortgage. He admitted that he was 
contractually obligated for the mortgage, even though he chose to no longer live in the 
house. This was a matter within his control. He did not provide sufficient evidence that 
any of his other debts were beyond his control or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, established a 
budget, or attempted to resolve his delinquent debts. He stated that he intended to 
contact his creditors after his hearing. There are no clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. Applicant has not initiated good-
faith efforts to repay or resolve the debts with his creditors. I find AG 20 ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. Applicant disputed the validity of certain debts but did not provide 
documented proof for the basis of his dispute or any other action he took to resolve the 
issues. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a high school graduate, 
whom his supervisor describes as a reliable worker with a good work ethic. He is 
considered honest and trustworthy. Applicant has approximately $64,691 of delinquent 
debts. He has not taken action to pay, resolve, or dispute the debts. He does not have a 
plan for paying the debts. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
